--- PAGE 1 ---
Beyond Accuracy: What Data Quality
Means to Data Consumers
RICHARD Y. WANG AND DIANE M. STRONG
RICHARD Y. WANG is Associate Professor of Information Technologies (IT) and
Co-Director for Total Data Quality Management (TDQM) at the MIT Sloan School
of Management, where he received a Ph.D. degree with an IT concentration. He is a
major proponent of data quality research, with more than twenty papers written to
develop a set of concepts, models, and methods for this field. Professor Wang received
more than one million dollars of research grants from both the public and private
sector. His work on data quality was applied, by the Navy, to the Naval Command,
Control, Communication, Computers, and Intelligence (C''l) information architecture.
He presented the state-of-the-art of data quality research and practice in the Chief
Infonnation Officer (CIO) conference in 1993, and spoke on "Data Quality in the
Information Highways" at the Enterprise '93 conference. Dr. Wang organized the first
Workshop on Infonnation Technologies and Systems (WITS) in 1991. At WITS-94
he was elected chairman of the Executive Steering Committee. He also chaired or
participated in the data quality panel at WITS and at the Intemational Conference on
Infonnation Systems. Dr. Wang is the editor of Information Technologies: Trends and
Perspectives.
DIANE M. STRONG is Assistant Professor of Management at Worcester Polytechnic
Institute. She received her Ph.D. in information systems from Carnegie Mellon
University, an M.S. in computer science from the New Jersey Institute of Technology,
and a B.S. in computer science from the University of South Dakota. Dr. Strong's
research centers on data and infonnation quality and software quality. Her publications
have appeared in A CM Transactions on Infonnation Systems, MIS Quarterly, Decision
Support Systems, and other leading journals.
ABSTRACT: Poor data quality (DQ) can have substantial social and economic impacts.
Although firms are improving data quality with practical approaches and tools, their
improvement efForts tend to focus narrowly on accuracy. We believe that data
consumers have a much broader data quality conceptualization than IS professionals
realize. The purpose of this paper is to develop a framework that captures the aspects
of data quality that are important to data consumers.
A two-stage survey and a two-phase sorting study were conducted to develop a
hierarchical framework for organizing data quality dimensions. This framework
Acknowledgments: Research conducted herein has been supported, in part, by MIT's Total Data
Quality Management (TDQM) Research Program and MIT's International Financial Services
Research Center (IFSRC). The authors wish to thank Lisa Guarascio for her field work and
factor analysis. Professors Donald Ballou, Izak Benbasat, and Stuart Madnick for providing
insightful comments and encouragement. Professors France LeClerc and Paul Berger for their
input on the design and execution of this research, and Daphne Png for conducting the
confimiatory experiment and summarizing its results.
Journal o^f Management Information Systems I Spring 1996, Vol. 12, No. 4, pp. 5-34
Copyright © 1996 M.E. Shaipe, Inc.

--- PAGE 2 ---
6 RICHARD Y. WANG AND DIANE M. STRONG
captures dimensions of data quality that are important to data consumers. Intrinsic DQ
denotes that data have quality in their own right. Contextual DQ highlights the
requirement that data quality must be considered within the context ofthe task at hand.
Representational DQ and accessibility DQ emphasize the importance ofthe role of
systems. These findings are consistent with our understanding that high-quality data
should be intrinsically good, contextually appropriate for the task, clearly represented,
and accessible to the data consumer.
Our framework has been used effectively in industry and govemment. Using
this framework, IS managers were able to better understand and meet their data
consumers' data quality needs. The salient feature of this research study is that
quality attributes of data are collected from data consumers instead of being
defmed theoretically or based on researchers' experience. Although exploratory,
this research provides a basis for future studies that measure data quality along the
dimensions of this framework.
KEY WORDS AND PHRASES: data administration, data quality, database systems.
Introduction
MANY DATABASES ARE NOT ERROR-FREE, AND SOME CONTAIN a surprisingly large
number of errors [3, 4, 5, 21, 28, 34, 38, 40]. A recent industry report, for example,
notes that more than 60 percent ofthe surveyed firms (500 medium-size corporations
with annual sales of more than $20 million) have problems with data quality.' Data
quality problems, however, go beyond accuracy to include other aspects such as
completeness and accessibility. A big New York bank found that the data in its
credit-risk management database were only 60 percent complete, necessitating dou-
ble-checking by anyone using it.^ A major manufacturing company found that it could
not access all sales data for a single customer because many different customer
numbers were assigned to represent the same customer. In short, poor data quality can
have substantial social and economic impacts.
To improve data quality, we need to understand what data quality means to data
consumers (those who use data). The purpose of this research, therefore, is to develop
a framework that captures the aspects of data quality that are important to data
consumers.
Related Research
The concept of "fitness for use" is now widely adopted in the quality literature. It
emphasizes the importance of taking a consumer viewpoint of quality because
ultimately it is the consumer who will judge whether or not a product is fit for use [13,
15,22,23]. In this research, we also take the consumer viewpoint of "fitness for use"
in conceptualizing the underlying aspects of data quality. Following this general
quality literature, we define "data quality" as data that are fit for use by data
consumers. In addition, we define a "data quality dimension" as a set of data quality
attributes that represent a single aspect or construct of data quality.

--- PAGE 3 ---
BEYOND ACCURACY: DATA QUALITY 7
Three approaches are used in the literature to study data quality: (1) an intuitive, (2)
a theoretical, and (3) an empirical approach. The intuitive approach is taken when the
selection of data quality attributes for any particular study is based on the researchers'
experience or intuitive understanding about what attributes are "important." Most data
quality studies fall into this category. The cumulative effect of these studies is a small
set of data quality attributes that are commonly selected. For example, many data
quality studies include accuracy as either the only or one of several key dimensions
[4, 28, 32]. In the accounting and auditing literature, reliability is a key attribute used
in studying data quality [7, 11, 21,24,25,49].
In the information systems literature, information quality and user satisfaction are
two major dimensions for evaluating the success of information systems [12]. These
two dimensions generally include some data quality attributes, such as accuracy,
timeliness, precision, reliability, currency, completeness, and relevancy [2, 20, 27].
Other attributes such as accessibility and interpretability are also used in the data
quality literature [44,45].
Most of these studies identify multiple dimensions of data qualify. Furthermore,
although a hierarchical view of data qualify is less common, it is reported in several
studies [27,34,44]. None of these studies, however, empirically collects data qualify
attributes from data consumers.
A theoretical approach to data qualify focuses on how data may become deficient
during the data manufacturing process. Although theoretical approaches are often
recommended, research offers few examples. One such study uses an ontological
approach in which attributes of data qualify are derived on the basis of data deficien-
cies, which are defined as the inconsistencies between the view of a real-world system
that can be inferred from a representing information system and the view that can be
obtained by directly observing the real-world system [42].
The advantage of using an intuitive approach is that each study can select the
attributes most relevant to the particular goals of that study. The advantage of a
theoretical approach is the potential to provide a comprehensive set of data qualify
attributes that are intrinsic to a data product. The problem with both of these
approaches is that they focus on the product in terms of development characteris-
tics instead of use characteristics. They fail to capture the voice of the consumer.
Evaluations of theoretical approaches to defining product attributes as a basis for
improving qualify find that they are not an adequate basis for improving qualify
and are significantly worse than empirical approaches.
To capture the data qualify attributes that are important to data consumers, we
take an empirical approach. An empirical approach to data qualify analyzes data
collected from data consumers to determine the characteristics they use to assess
whether data are fit for use in their tasks. Therefore, these characteristics cannot be
theoretically determined or intuitively selected by researchers. The advantage of an
empirical approach is that it captures the voice of customers. Furthermore, it may
reveal characteristics that researchers have not considered as part of data qualify. The
disadvantage is that the correctness or completeness of the results cannot be proven
via fundamental principles.

--- PAGE 4 ---
8 RICHARD Y. WANG AND DIANE M. STRONG
Research Approach
We follow the methods developed in marketing research for determining the quality
characteristics of products. Our approach implicitly assumes that data can be treated
as a product. It is an appropriate approach because an information system can be
viewed as a data manufacturing system acting on raw data input to produce output
data or data products [1, 6, 16, 19, 35, 43, 46]. While most data consumers are not
purchasing data, they are choosing to use or not to use data in a variety of tasks.
Approaches for assessing product quality attributes that are important to consumers
are well established in the marketing discipline [8, 26]. Three tasks are suggested in
identifying quality attributes of a product: (1) identifying consumer needs, (2) identi-
fying the hierarchical stmcture of consumer needs, and (3) measuring the importance
of each consumer need [17, 18].
Following the marketing literature, this research identifies the attributes of data
quality that are important to data consumers. We first collect data quality attributes
from data consumers, and then collect importance ratings for these attributes and
structure them into a hierarchical representation of data consumers' data quality needs.
Our goal is to develop a comprehensive, hierarchical framework of data quality
attributes that are important to data consumers.
Some researchers may doubt the validity of asking consumers about important
quality attributes because ofthe well-known difficulties with evaluating users' satis-
faction with information systems [30]. Importance ratings and user satisfaction,
however, are two different constructs. Griffin and Hauser [17], for example, demonstr-
ate that determining attributes of importance to consumers, collecting importance
ratings of these attributes, and measuring attribute values are valid characterizations
of consumers' actions such as purchasing the product, but satisfaction ratings of these
attributes are uncorrelated with consumer actions.
Research Method
We first developed two surveys that were used to collect data from data consumers
(referred to as the two-stage survey later). The first survey produced a list of possible
data quality attributes, attributes that came to mind when the data consumer thought
about data quality. The second survey assessed the importance of these possible data
quality attributes to data consumers. The importance ratings from the second survey
were used in an exploratory factor analysis to yield an intermediate set of data quality
dimensions that were important to data consumers.
Because the detailed surveys produced a comprehensive set of data quality attributes
for input to factor analysis, a broad spectrum of intermediate data quality dimensions
were revealed. We conducted a follow-up empirical study to group these intermediate
data quality dimensions for the following reasons. First, it is probably not critical for
evaluation purposes to consider so many quality dimensions [27]. Second, although
these dimensions can be ranked by the importance ratings, the highest ranking
dimensions may not capture the essential aspects of data quality. Third, the interme-

--- PAGE 5 ---
BEYOND ACCURACY: DATA QUALITY 9
diate dimensions seem to form several families of factors. Grouping these intermediate
data quality dimensions into families of factors is consistent with research in the
marketing discipline. For example, Deshpande [14] grouped participation in decision
making and hierarchy of authority together as a family, named centralization factors,
and job codification andjob specificity as a family, namedformalization factors.
In grouping these intermediate dimensions into families, we used a preliminary
conceptual framework developed from our experience with data consumers. This
conceptual framework consisted of four "ideal" or target categories. Our intent was
to evaluate the extent to which the intermediate dimensions matched these categories.
Thus, our follow-up study moved beyond the purely exploratory nature of the
two-stage survey to a more confirmatory study.
This follow-up study consisted of two phases (referred to later as the two-phase
study). For the first phase, subjects were instructed to sort these dimensions into
categories, and then label the categories. For the second phase, a different set of
subjects was instructed to sort these dimensions into the categories revealed from the
first phase to confirm these findings.
The key result of this research is a comprehensive framework of data quality from
data consumers' perspectives. Such a framework serves as a foundation for improving
the data quality dimensions that are important to data consumers. Our analysis is
oriented toward the characteristics of the quality of data in use, in addition to the
characteristics of the quality of data in production and storage; therefore, it extends
the concept of data quality beyond the traditional development view. Our results have
been used effectively in industry and government. Several Fortune 100 companies and
the U.S. Navy [33] have used our framework to identify potential areas of data
deficiencies, operationalize the measurements of these data deficiencies, and improve
data quality along these measures.
Preliminary Conceptual Framework
Based on the limited relevant literature, the concept of fitness for use from the quality
literature, and our experiences with data consumers, we propose a preliminary con-
ceptual framework for data quality that includes the following aspects:
• The data must be accessible to the data consumer. For example, the consumer
knows how to retrieve the data.
• The consumer must be able to interpret the data. For example, the data are not
represented in a foreign language.
• The data must be relevant to the consumer. For example, data are relevant and
timely for use by the data consumer in the decision-making process.
• The consumer must find the data accurate. For example, the data are correct,
objective and come from reputable sources.
Although we hypothesize that any data quality framework that captures data
consumers' perspectives of data quality will include the above aspects, we do not bias
our initial data collection in the direction of our conceptualization. To be unbiased.

--- PAGE 6 ---
10 RICHARD Y. WANG AND DIANE M. STRONG
we Start with an exploratory approach that includes not only the attributes in our
preliminary framework, but also the attributes mentioned in the literature. For exam-
ple, our first questionnaire starts with some attributes (timeliness and availability) that
are not part of this preliminary framework.
The Two-Stage Survey
THE PURPOSE OF THIS TWO-STAGE SURVEY IS TO IDENTIFY data quality dimensions
perceived by data consumers. In the following, we summarize the method and key
results of these surveys. The reader is referred to [47] for more detailed results.
Method
The method for the two-stage survey was as follows: For stage 1, we conducted a
survey to generate a list of data quality attributes that capture data consumers'
perspectives of data quality. For stage 2, we conducted a survey to collect data on the
importance of each of these attributes to data consumers, and then performed an
exploratory factor analysis on the importance data to develop an intermediate set of
data quality dimensions.^
The First Survey
The purpose of the first survey was to generate an extensive list of potential data quality
attributes. Since the data quality dimensions resulting from factor analysis depend, to
a large extent, on the list of attributes generated from the first survey, we decided that
(1) the subjects should be data consumers who have used data to make decisions in
diverse contexts within organizations, and (2) we should be able to probe and question
the subjects in order to fully understand their answers.
Subjects: Two pools of subjects were selected. The first consisted of 25 data
consumers currently working in industry. The second was M.B.A. students at a large
U.S. university. We selected 112 students who had work experience as data consum-
ers. The average age of these students was over 30.
Survey Instrument: The survey instrument (see appendix A) included two sections
for eliciting data quality attributes. The first section elicited respondents' first reaction
to data quality by asking them to list those attributes that first came to mind when they
thought of data quality (beyond the common attributes of timeliness, accuracy,
availability, and interpretability). The second section provided further cues by listing
32 attributes beyond the four common ones to "spark" any additional attributes. These
32 attributes were obtained from data quality literature and discussions among data
quality researchers.
Procedure: For the selected M.B.A. students, the survey was self-administered. For
the subjects working in industry, the administration of the survey was followed by a
discussion of the meanings of the attributes the subjects generated.
Results: This process resulted in 179 attributes, as shown in figure 1.

--- PAGE 7 ---
BEYOND ACCURACY: DATA QUALITY 11
Ability to be
Joined With
Acceptability
Adaptability
Age
Auditable
Breadth of Data
Clarity of Origin
Competitive Edge
Concise
Consistency
Convenience
Cost of Accuracy
Current
Data Overload
Detail
Dynamic
Ease of Data
Exchange
Ease of Update
Efficiency
Error-Free
Extensibility
Flexibility
Friendliness
Importance
Interactive
Localized
Measurable
Modularity
Novelty
Origin
Pedigree
Preciseness
Quantity
Relevance
Reputation
Revealing
Scope of Info
Semantic
Interpretation
Specificity
Synchronization
Translatable
Understandable
Usable
Value
Volatility
Ability to Download
Access by
Competition
Adequate Detail
Aggregatability
Authority
Brevity
Clear Data
Responsibility
Completeness
Conciseness
Content
Correctness
Cost of Collection
Customizability
Definability
Detailed Source
Ease of Access
Ease of Maintenance
Ease of Use
Endurance
Expandability
Extent
Form of Presentation
Generality
Inconsistencies
Interesting
Logically Connected
Medium
Narrowly Defined
Objectivity
Parsimony
Personalized
Precision
Rationality
Reliability
Ability to Identify
Errors
Accessibility
Adequate Volume
Alterability
Availability
Certified Data
Compactness
Comprehensiveness
Confidentiality
Context
Corruption
Creativity
Data Hierarchy
Dependability
Dispersed
Ease of Comparison
Ease of Retrieval
Easy to Change
Enlightening
Expense
Finalization
Format
Habit
Integration
Level of Abstraction
Manageability
Meets Requirements
No lost information
Optimality
Partitionability
Pertinent
Proprietary Nature
Redundancy
Repetitive
Resolution of Graphics Responsibility
Reviewability
Secrecy
Semantics
Speed
Time-independence
Transportability
Uniqueness
Usefulness
Variability
Well-Documented
Rigidity
Security
Size
Stability
Timeliness
Unambiguity
Unorganized
User Friendly
Variety
Well-Presented
Ability to Upload
Accuracy
Aestheticism
Amount of Data
Believability
Clarity
Compatibility
Compressibility
Conformity
Continuity
Cost
Critical
Data Improves
Pffipionf^v
Depth of Data
Distinguishable
Updated Files
Ease of
Correlation
Ease of
Understanding
Easy to Question
Ergonomic
Extendibility
Flawlessness
Integrity
Historical
Compatibility
Integrity
Level of
Standardization
Manipulable
Minimality
Normality
Orderliness
Past Experience
Portability
Purpose
Regularity of Format
Reproducibility
Retrievability
Robustness
Self-Correcting
Source
Storage
Traceable
Unbiased
Up-to-Date
Valid
Verifiable
Figure I. Data Quality Attributes Generated from the First Survey

--- PAGE 8 ---
12 RICHARD Y. WANG AND DIANE M. STRONG
The Second Survey
The purpose ofthe second survey was to collect data about the importance of quality
attributes as perceived by data consumers. The results of the second survey were
ratings ofthe importance ofthe data quality attributes. These importance ratings were
the input for an exploratory factor analysis to consolidate these attributes into a set of
data quality dimensions.
Subjects: Since we needed a sample consisting of a wide range of data consumers
with different perspectives, we selected the alumni ofthe M.B.A. program of a large
university who reside in the United States. These alumni consisted of individuals in a
variety of industries, departments, and management levels who regularly used data to
make decisions, thus satisfying the requirement for data consumers with diverse
perspectives. From over 3,200 alumni, we randomly selected 1,500 subjects.
Survey Instrument: The list of attributes shown in figure 1 was used to develop the
second survey questionnaire (see appendix B). The questionnaire asked the respondent
to rate the importance of each data quality attribute for their data on a scale from 1 to
9, where I was extremely important and 9 not important. The questionnaire was
divided into four sections, depending on the appropriate wording ofthe attributes, for
example, as stand-alone adjectives or as complete sentences. Since we did not include
defmitions with the attributes, it is possible that data consumers responding to the
surveys could interpret the meanings ofthe attributes differently. Attributes that are
not important or that are not consistently interpreted across data consumers will not
show up as significant in the factor analysis.
A pretest ofthe questionnaire was administered to fifteen respondents: five industry
executives, six professionals, two professors, and two M.B.A. students. Minor changes
were made in the format ofthe survey as a result ofthe pretest. Based on the results
from the pretest, the final second survey questionnaire included 118 data quality
attributes (i.e., 118 items for factor analysis) to be rated for their importance, as shown
in appendix B.
Procedure: This survey was mailed along with a cover letter explaining the nature
of the study, the time to complete the survey (less than twenty minutes), and its
criticality. Most ofthe alumni addresses were home addresses. To assure a successful
survey, we sent the survey questionnaires via first-class mail. We gave respondents a
six-week cut-off period to respond to the survey.
Response Rate: Ofthe 1,500 surveys mailed, sixteen were returned as undeliverable.
Ofthe remaining 1,484, 355 viable surveys (an effective response rate of 24 percent)
were returned by the six-week deadline.'*
Missing Responses: While none ofthe 118 attributes (items) had 355 responses,
none had fewer than 329 responses. There did not appear to be any significant pattem
to the missing responses.
Results: Descriptive statistics ofthe 118 items (attributes) are presented in appendix
C. Most of the 118 items had a full range of values from 1 to 9, where 1 means
extremely important and 9 not important. The exceptions were accuracy, reliability,
level of detail, and easy identification of errors. Accuracy and reliability had the

--- PAGE 9 ---
BEYOND ACCURACY: DATA QUALITY 13
smallest range, with values ranging from 1 to 7; level of detail and easy identification
of errors ranged from 1 to 8. Ninety-nine ofthe 118 items (85 percent) had means
less than or equal to 5; that is, most of the items surveyed were considered to be
important data quality attributes. Two items—accuracy and correct—had means less
than 2 and thus were overall the most important data quality attributes, with means of
1.771 and 1.816, respectively. An exploratory factor analysis ofthe importance ratings
produced twenty dimensions, as shown in Table 1. As mentioned earlier, more
detailed results can be found in [47].
Factor Interpretation: Factor analysis is appropriate for this study because its
primary application is to uncover an underlying data structure [ 10,37]. An altemative
method would be to ask subjects to group the attributes into common dimensions, as
we did in the second phase of this research. Grouping tasks provide more assurance
that the factors are interpretable. While both factor analysis and grouping tasks are
used in the literature to uncover dimensions, grouping tasks become impractical when
the number of items increases. Furthermore, factor analysis can uncover dimensions
that are not obvious to researchers.
A potential disadvantage of factor analysis in this research is that attributes with
nothing in common could load on the same factor because they have the same
importance ratings. This would lead to problems in interpreting the factors. Importance
ratings collected from a sample of 355 data consumers with diverse backgrounds,
however, will be similar only if data consumers perceive these items consistently. If
these items form different constructs, data consumers will rate their importance
differently, resulting in different factors. Furthermore, the twenty dimensions show
face validity because it was easy for us to name these factors.
Factor Stability: Since the number of survey responses relative to the number of
attributes is lower than recommended, it is possible that the factor structure is not
sufficiently stable. To test factor stability, we reran the analysis using two different
approaches. First, in a series of factor analysis runs, we varied the number of factors
to test whether the attributes loading on those factors changed as the number of
factors changed. Second, we ran the factor analysis using as input only those
attributes that actually loaded on the twenty dimensions to test whether the insignif-
icant attributes affected the results.
In the first approach, our analysis of factor stability found that fourteen out ofthe
twenty dimensions were stable across the series of runs. That is, the same dimensions
consisting ofthe same attributes emerged (see Table 1). Two dimensions, 15 (ease of
operation) and 20 (flexibility), were stable in terms ofthe attributes loading on them,
but were combined into a single dimension in runs fixed at fewer dimensions. Four
dimensions, 5, 9, 16, and 19, which are all single-attribute factors, have less than
desirable stability. Specifically, in some runs, these dimensions either were not
significant or they were combined with another single-attribute dimension.
In the second approach, the factor analysis used the 71 attributes shown in Table 1, which
meets responses-to-attribute ratio recommendations. The second approach produced the
same results as the first. Thus, we conclude that these dimensions are stable with the caveat
that additional research is needed to verify most ofthe single-attribute dimensions.

--- PAGE 10 ---
14 RICHARD Y. WANG AND DIANE M. STRONG
Table 1. Description of the Dimensions
Dim.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
Name of dimension
(attribute list)
Believability (believable)
Value-added (data give you
a competitive edge, data add
value to your operations)
Relevancy (applicable,
relevant, interesting, usable)
Accuracy (data are certified
error-free, accurate,
correct, flawless, reliable,
errors can be easily
identified, the integrity of the
data, precise)
Interpretability (interpretable)
Ease of understanding
(easily understood, clear,
readable)
Accessibility (accessible,
retrievable, speed of
access, available, up-to-
date)
Objectivity (unbiased,
objective)
Timeliness (age of data)
Completeness (breadth,
depth, and scope of
information contained in the
data)
Traceability (well-
documented, easily traced,
verifiable)
Reputation (reputation of the
data source, reputation of
the data)
Representational
consistency (data are
continuously presented in
same format, consistently
represented, consistently
formatted, data are
compatible with previous
data)
Mean
2.71
2.83
2.95
3.05
3.20
3.22
3.47
3.58
3.64
3.88
3.97
4.04
4.22
S.D.
0.10
0.09
0.06
0.10
0.09
0.07
0.08
0.09
0.11
0.09
0.09
0.10
0.09
C.I.
2.51-2.91
2.65-3.01
2.82-3.08
2.86-3.24
3.03-3.37
3.07-3.37
3.32-3.62
3.40-3.76
3.43-3.85
3.74-4.06
3.79-4.14
3.83-4.25
4.04-4.39
Cronbach a
N/A
0.70
0.69
0.87
N/A
0.79
0.81
0.73
N/A
0.98
0.79
0.87
0.84
14 Cost-effectiveness (cost of
data accuracy, cost of data
collection, cost-effective)
4.25 0.10 4.05-4.44 0.85

--- PAGE 11 ---
BEYOND ACCURACY: DATA QUALITY 15
Table 1. Continued
Dim. Name of dimension
(attribute list)
Mean S.D. C.I. Cronbach a
15 Ease of operation (easily 4.28
joined, easiiy changed,
easily updated, easiiy
downioaded/upioaded, data
can be used for multiple
purposes, manipulable,
easily aggregated, easily
reproduced, data can be
easily integrated, easily
customized)
16 Variety of data and data 4.71
sources (you have a variety
of data and data sources)
17 Concise (well-presented, 4.75
concise, compactly
represented, well-organized,
aesthetically pleasing, form
of presentation, well-
formatted, format of the data)
18 Access security (data cannot 4.92
be accessed by competitors,
data are of a proprietary
nature, access to data can
be restricted, secure)
19 Appropriate amount of data 5.01
(the amount of data)
20 Flexibility (adaptable, 5.34
flexible, extendable,
expandable)
0.08 4.13-4.44 0.90
0.12 4.4&-4.95 N/A
0.08 4.59-4.92 0.92
0.11 4.70-5.14 0.84
0.11 4.79-5.23 N/A
0.09 5.17-6.51 0.88
A dimension mean was computed as the average ofthe responses to all ofthe items
with a loading of 0.5 or greater on the dimension. For example, the dimension ease of
understanding consisted ofthe three items: easily understood, readable, and clear.
The mean importance for ea.se of understanding was the average ofthe importance
ratings for easily understood, readable, and clear. (See Table 1 for the means, standard
deviations, and confidence intervals.)
Cronbach's alpha, ameasure of construct reliability, was computed for each dimen-
sion to assess the reliability ofthe set of items forming that dimension. As shown in
the rightmost column of Table 1, these alpha coefficients ranged from 0.69 to 0.98. As
a rule, alphas of 0.70 or above represent satisfactory reliability of the set of items
measuring the construct (dimension). Thus, the items measuring our dimensions are
sufficiently reliable.

--- PAGE 12 ---
16 RICHARD Y. WANG AND DIANE M. STRONG
Table 2. Four Target Categories for the 20 Dimensions
Target category Dimension Adjustment
Accuracy of data
Relevancy of data
Representation of data
Accessibility of data
Believability
Accuracy
Objectivity
Completeness
Traceability
Reputation
Variety of Data Sources
Value-added
Relevancy
Timeliness
Ease of operation
Appropriate amount of data
Flexibility
Interpretability
Ease of understanding
Representational consistency
Concise representation
Accessibility
Cost-effectiveness
Access security
None
None
None
Moved to category 2
Eliminated
None
Eliminated
None
None
None
Eliminated
None
Eliminated
None
None
None
None
None
Eliminated
None
Note: A target category is a hypothesized category based on our preliminary conceptual
framework.
The Two-Phase Sorting Study
TWENTY DIMENSIONS WERE TOO MANY FOR PRACTICAL EVALUATION PURPOSES. In
addition, although these dimensions were ranked by the importance ratings, the
highest-ranking dimensions might not capture the essential aspects of data quality.
Finally, a grouping of these dimensions was consistent with research in the marketing
discipline, and substantiated a hierarchical structure of data quality dimensions.
Using our preliminary conceptual framework, we conducted a two-phase sorting
study. The first phase of the study was to sort these intermediate dimensions into a
small set of categories. The second phase was to confirm that these dimensions indeed
belonged to the categories in our preliminary conceptual framework.
Method
We first created four categories (see column 1 of Table 2) based on our preliminary
conceptual framework, following Moore and Benbasat [31 ]. We then grouped the 20
intermediate dimensions into these four categories (see column 2 of Table 2). Our
initial grouping was based on our understanding of these categories and dimensions.
The sorting study provided the data to test this initial grouping and to make adjustments

--- PAGE 13 ---
BEYOND ACCURACY: DATA QUALITY 17
in the assignment of dimensions to target categories (see column 3 of Table 2), which
will be further discussed.
The Sorting Study: Phase 1
Subjects: Thirty subjects from industry were selected to participate in the overall
sorting procedure. These subjects were enrolled in an evening M.B.A. class in another
large university. Eighteen of these 30 subjects were randomly selected to participate
in the first phase.
Design: Each of the 20 dimensions, along with a description, was printed on a
3x5-inch card, as shown in appendix Dl. These cards were used by each of the
subjects in the study to group the 20 dimensions into a small set of categories. In
contrast to phase 2, the subjects for phase 1 were not given a prespecified set of
categories each with a name and description. The study was pretested by two
graduate-level MIS students to clarify any ambiguity in the design or instruction.
Procedure: The study was run by a third party who was not aware of the goal of this
research, in order to avoid any bias by the authors. Before performing the actual sorting
task, subjects performed a trial sort using dimensions other than these 20 dimensions
to ensure that they understood the procedure. In the actual sorting task, subjects were
given instructions to group the 20 cards into three to five piles. The subjects were then
asked to label each of their piles.
The Sorting Study: Phase 2
The original assignment of dimensions to categories was adjusted based on the results
from the phase 1 study. For example, as shown in column 3 of Table 2, completeness
is moved from the accuracy category to the relevancy category because only four
subjects assigned this dimension to the former category, whereas twelve assigned it
to the latter. This was a reasonable adjustment because completeness could be
interpreted within the context of the data consumer's task instead of our initial
interpretation that completeness was part of the accuracy category.
In addition, five dimensions were eliminated: traceability, variety of data sources,
ease of operation, flexibility, and cost-effectiveness. These dimensions were elimi-
nated for both of the following two reasons: First, subjects did not consistently assign
the dimension to any category. For example, seven subjects assigned cost-effective-
ness to the relevancy category, three assigned it to the other three categories, and eight
assigned it to a self-defined category. Second, the dimension was not ranked highly
in terms of importance. For example, cost-effectiveness was ranked 14 out of 20.
The purpose of the second phase of the sorting study was to confirm that the
dimensions indeed belonged to these adjusted categories.
Subjects: The remaining twelve subjects from our subject pool participated in this
phase of study.
Design: For each category of dimensions revealed from phase 1, the authors
provided a label, as shown in appendix D2, based on the underlying dimensions.

--- PAGE 14 ---
18 RICHARD Y. WANG AND DIANE M. STRONG
Descriptive phrases, rather than single words, were used as labels to avoid confound-
ing category labels with any of the dimension labels.
Procedure: The third party that ran the phase 1 study also ran the phase 2 study. The
procedure for phase 2 was similar to that of phase 1, with the exception that subjects
were instructed to place each of the dimension cards into the category that best
represents that dimension.
Findings
In this section, we present the results from the two-phase study. We using the adjusted
target categories to tabulate the results from the phase 1 study. As shown in Table 3,
the overall placement ratio of dimensions within target categories was 70 percent. This
indicated that these 15 dimensions were generally being placed in the appropriate
categories.
These results, together with the adjustment of dimensions within the target catego-
ries, led us to refine the four target categories as follows:
1. The extent to which data values are in conformance with the actual or true
values;
2. The extent to which data are applicable (pertinent) to the task of the data user;
3. The extent to which data are presented in an intelligible and clear manner;
and
4. The extent to which data are available or obtainable.
These four descriptions were used as the category labels for the phase 2 study. The
results from the phase 2 study (Table 4) showed that the overall placement ratio of
dimensions within target categories was 81 percent.
Toward a Hierarchical Framework of Data Quality
IN OUR SORTING STUDY, WE LABELED EACH CATEGORY on the basis of our preliminary
conceptual framework and our initial grouping of the dimensions. For example, we
labeled as accuracy ihc category that includes accuracy, objectivity, believability, and
reputation. Similarly, we labeled the three other categories as relevancy, representa-
tion, and accessibility. We used such a labeling so that we would not introduce any
additional interpretations or biases into the sorting tasks.
However, such representative labels did not necessarily capture the essence of the
underlying dimensions as a group. For example, as a whole, the group of dimensions
labeled accuracy was richer than that conveyed by the label accuracy. Thus, we
reexamined the underlying dimensions confirmed for each of the four categories and
picked a label that captured the essence of the entire category. For example, we
relabeled accuracy as intrinsic DQ because the underlying dimensions captured the
intrinsic aspect of data quality.
As a result of this reexamination, we relabeled two of the four categories. The
resulting categories, therefore, are: intrinsic DQ, contextual DQ, representational DQ,

--- PAGE 15 ---
BEYOND ACCURACY: DATA QUALITY 19
Table 3. Results from the Phase 1 Study (15 Dimensions and 18 Subjects)
Actual categories
Target Accuracy Relevancy Represen- Access- N/A Total Target
categories tation ibility (%)
Accuracy 57 10 2 1 2 72 79
Relevancy 16 56 11 2 5 90 62
Repres. 8 4 50 5 5 72 69
Access. 1 2 3 26 4 36 72
Total item placements: 270
Hits: 189
Overall hits ratio: 70%
Note: A target category is a hypothesized category based on our preliminary conceptual framework.
An actual category is the category selected by the subjects for a dimension. "N/A" denotes "Not
Applicable," which means that the actual category does not fit into any target category.
Table 4. Results from the Phase 2 Study (15 Dimensions and 12 Subjects)
Actual categories
Target Accuracy Relevancy Represen- Access- Total Target (%)
categories tation ibility
Accuracy 43 3 1 0 48 90
Relevancy 7 44 3 6 60 73
Repres. 2 6 40 0 48 83
Access. 1 1 3 19 24 79
Total item placements: 180
Hits: 146
Overail hits ratio: 81%
and accessibility DQ (see figure 2). Intrinsic DQ denotes that data have quality in their
own right. Accuracy is merely one ofthe four dimensions underlying this category.
Contextual DQ highlights the requirement that data quality must be considered within
the context ofthe task at hand; that is, data must be relevant, timely, complete, and
appropriate in terms of amount so as to add value. Representational DQ and accessi-
bility DQ emphasize the importance ofthe role of systems; that is, the system must
be accessible but secure, and the system must present data in such a way that they are
interpretable, easy to understand, and represented concisely and consistently.
This hierarchical framework confirms and substantiates the preliminary framework
that we proposed. Below we elaborate on these four categories, relate them to the
literature, and discuss some future research directions.

--- PAGE 16 ---
20 RICHARD Y. WANG AND DIANE M. STRONG
1
Intrinsic
Data Quality
Believability (1)
Accuracy (4)
Obieclivily (8)
Reputation (12)
Data Quality
1
Contextual
Data Quality
HValue-added (2)
Relevancy (3)
Timeliness (9)
Completeness (10)
Appropriate amount of data (19)
Representational
Data Quality
Accessibility
Data Quality
Interpretability (5)
Ease of understanding (6)
Representational consistency (13)
Concise representation (17)
Accessibility (7)
Access security (18)
Figure 2. A Conceptual Framework of Data Quality
Intrinsic Data Quality
Intrinsic DQ includes not only accuracy and objectivity, which are evident to IS
professionals, but also believability and reputation. This suggests that, contrary to the
traditional development view, data consumers also view believability and reputation
as an integral part of intrinsic DQ; accuracy and objectivity alone are not sufficient
for data to be considered of high quality. This is analogous to some aspects of product
quality. In the product quality area, dimensions of quality emphasized by consumers
are broader than those emphasized by product manufacturers. Similarly, intrinsic DQ
encompasses more than the accuracy and objectivity dimensions that IS professionals
strive to deliver. This finding implies that IS professionals should also ensure the
believability and reputation of data. Research on data source tagging [45,48] is a step
in this direction.
Contextual Data Quality
Some individual dimensions underlying contextual DQ were reported previously; for
example, completeness and timeliness [4]. However, contextual DQ was not explicitly
recognized in the data quality literature. Our grouping of dimensions for contextual
DQ revealed that data quality must be considered within the context of the task at
hand. This was consistent with the literature on graphical data representation, which
concluded that the quality of a graphical representation must be assessed within the
context ofthe data consumer's task [41].
Since tasks and their contexts vary across time and data consumers, attaining high
contextual data quality is a research challenge [29, 39]. One approach is to parame-
terize contextual dimensions for each task so that a data consumer can specify what
type of task is being performed and the appropriate contextual parameters for that task.
Below we illustrate such a research prototype.

--- PAGE 17 ---
BEYOND ACCURACY: DATA QUALITY 21
During Desert Storm combat operations in the Persian Gulf, naval researchers
recognized the need to explicitly incorporate contextual DQ into information systems
in order to deliver more timely and accurate infonnation. As a result, a prototype is
being developed that will be deployed to the U.S. aircraft carriers as stand-alone image
exploitation tools [33]. This prototype parameterizes contextual dimensions for each
task so that a pilot or a strike planner can specify what type of task (e.g., strike plan
or damage assessment) is being performed and the appropriate contextual parameters
(relevant images in terms of location, currency, resolution, and target type) for that
task.
Representational Data Quality
Representational DQ includes aspects related to the format ofthe data {concise and
consistent representation) and meaning of data {interpretability and ease of under-
standing). These two aspects suggest that for data consumers to conclude that data are
well represented, they must not only be concise and consistently represented, but also
interpretable and easy to understand.
Issues related to meaning and format arise in database systems research in which
format is addressed as part of syntax, and meaning as part of semantic reconciliation.
One focus of current research in that area is context interchange among heterogeneous
database systems [36]. For example, currency figures in the context of a U.S. database
are typically in dollars, whereas those in a Japanese database are likely to be in yen.
This type of context belongs to the representational DQ, instead of contextual DQ,
which deals with the data consumer's task.
Accessibility Data Quality
Information systems professionals understand accessibility DQ well. Our research
findings show that data consumers also recognize its importance. Our findings appear
to differ from the literature that treats accessibility as distinct from information quality
(see, e.g., [9]). A closer examination reveals that accessibility is presumed (i.e., perfect
accessibility DQ) in earlier information quality literature because hard-copy reports
were used instead of on-line data. In contrast, data consumers in our research access
computers for their information needs, and therefore, view accessibility DQ as an
important data quality aspect. However, there is little difference between treating
accessibility DQ as a category of overall data quality, or separating it from other
categories of data quality. In either case, accessibility needs to be taken into account.
Summary and Conclusions
To IMPROVE DATA QUALITY, WE NEED TO UNDERSTAND WHAT DATA QUALITY means
to data consumers (those who use data). This research develops a hierarchical
framework that captures the aspects of data quality that are important to data consum-
ers. Specifically, 118 data quality attributes collected from data consumers are

--- PAGE 18 ---
22 RICHARD Y. WANG AND DIANE M. STRONG
consolidated into twenty dimensions, which in turn are grouped into four categories.
Using this framework, information systems professionals will be able to better
understand and meet their data consumers' data quality needs.
In developing this framework, we conducted a two-stage survey and a two-phase
sorting study. The resulting framework has four data quality (DQ) categories: (I)
intrinsic DQ consists of accuracy, objectivity, believability, and reputation; (2) con-
textual DQ consists of value-added, relevancy, timeliness, completeness, and appro-
priate amount of data; (3) representational DQ consists of interpretability, ease of
understanding, representational consistency, and concise representation; and (4) ac-
cessibility DQ consists of accessibility and access security.
Intrinsic DQ denotes that data have quality in their own right. Contextual DQ
highlights the requirement that data quality must be considered within the context of
the task at hand. Representational DQ and accessibility DQ emphasize the importance
of the role of systems. These fmdings are consistent with our understanding that
high-quality data should be intrinsically good, contextually appropriate for the task,
clearly represented, and accessible to the data consumer.
The salient feature of this research study is that quality attributes of data are collected
from data consumers instead of being defmed theoretically or based on researchers'
experience. Furthermore, this study provides additional evidence for a hierarchical
structure of data quality dimensions. At a basic level, the justification for the frame-
work is that a data quality framework does not exist and one is needed so that data
quality can be measured, analyzed, and improved in a valid way. Information systems
researchers have chosen many different dependent variables for assessing information
systems in general, and data quality in particular, with little empirical or theoretical
foundation for their choice. This framework provides a basis for deciding which
aspects of data quality to use in any research study.
The framework is frirther justified by the use of well-established empirical methods
in its development. Thus, we argue that the framework is methodologically sound, and
that it is complete from the perspective of data consumers. Furthermore, this frame-
work will be usefril as a basis for measuring, analyzing, and improving data quality.
While we have only anecdotal evidence to support this claim, that anecdotal evidence
is strong and convincing.
This framework was used effectively in industry and government. For example, IS
managers in one investment firm thought they had perfect data quality (in terms of
accuracy) in their organizational databases. However, in their discussion with data
consumers using this framework, they found several deficiencies: (1) additional
information about data sources was needed so that data consumers could assess the
reputation and believability of data; (2) data downloaded to servers from the main-
frame were not sufficiently timely for some data consumers' tasks; and (3) the
currency ($, £, or ¥) and unit (thousands or millions) of fmancial data from different
servers were implicit so data consumers could not always interpret and understand
these data correctly.
Based on this hierarchical framework, several research directions can be pursued.
First, a questionnaire could be developed to measure perceived data quality. The data

--- PAGE 19 ---
BEYOND ACCURACY: DATA QUALITY 23
quality categories and their underlying dimensions in this framework would provide
the constructs to be measured. Second, methods for improving the quality of data as
perceived by data consumers could be developed. Such methods could include user
training to change the quality of data as perceived by data consumers. Third, the
framework could be useful as a checklist during data requirements analysis. That is,
many of the data quality characteristics are actually system requirements or user
training requirements. Finally, since a single empirical study is never sufficient to
validate the completeness of a framework, further research is needed to apply this
framework in specific work contexts.
NOTES
1. Computerworld, September 28, 1992, p. 80-84.
2. The Wall Street Journal, May 26, 1992, p. B6.
3. We refer to the characteristics of data quality as data quality attributes or as measure-
ment items to distinguish them from data quality dimensions which result from the factor
analysis throughout this section.
4. Surveys with significant missing values (nine surveys) or surveys returned by
academics (fourteen surveys) were not considered viable and therefore were eliminated
from our analysis.
REFERENCES
1. Arnold, S.E. Information manufacturing: the road to database quality. Database, 15, 5
(1992), 32.
2. Bailey, J.E., and Pearson, S.W. Development of a tool for measuring and analyzing
computer user satisfaction. Management Science, 29, 5 (\ 983), 530-545.
3. Ballou, D.P., and Pazer, H.L. Designing information systems to optimize the accuracy-
timeliness tradeoff. Information Systems Research (lSR), 6, 1 (1995), 51—72.
4. Ballou, D.P., and Pazer, H.L. Modeling data and process quality in multi-input, multi-
output infonnation systems. Management Science, 31, 2 (1985), 150-162.
5. Ballou, D.P., and Tayi, K.G. Methodology for allocating resources for data quality
enhancement. Communications ofthe ACM. 32, 3 (1989), 320-329.
6. Ballou, D.P.; Wang, R.Y.; Pazer, H.; and Tayi, K.G. Modeling data manufacturing
systems to determine data product quality. Total Data Quality Management (TDQM) Research
Program, MIT Sloan School of Management, No. TDQM-93-09, 1993.
7. Bodnar, G. Reliability modeling of internal control systems. Accounting Review. 50, 4
(1975), 747-757.
8. Churchill, G.A. Marketing Research: Methodological Foundations, 5th ed. Chicago:
Dryden Press, 1991.
9. Culnan, M. The dimensions of accessibility to online information: implications for
implementing office infonnation systems. ACM Transactions on Office Information Systems.
2,2(1984), 141-150.
10. Cureton, E.E., and D'Agostino, R.B. Factor Analysis: An Applied Approach. Hillsdale,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum, 1983.
11. Cushing, B.E. A mathematical approach to the analysis and design of intemal control
systems. Accounting Review, 49, 1 (1974), 24—41.
12. Delone, W.H., and McLean, E.R. Information systems success: the quest for the depen-
dent variable. Information Systems Research. 3, 1 (1992), 60-95.
13. Deming, E.W. Out ofthe Crisis. Cambridge, MA: Center for Advanced Engineering
Study, MIT, 1986.
14. Deshpande, R. The organizational context of market research use. Journal of Marketing.
-^(5, 4 (1992), 92-101.

--- PAGE 20 ---
24 RICHARD Y. WANG AND DIANE M. STRONG
15. Dobyns, L., and Crawford-Mason, C. Quality or Else: The Revolution in World Business.
Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1991.
16. Emery, J.C. Organizational Planning and Control Systems: Theory and Technology.
New York: Macmilian, 1969.
17. Griffin, A., and Hauser, J.R. The voice of the customer. A/arfeft'ng Science, 12,1 (1993),
1-27.
18. Hauser, J.R., and Clausing, D. The house of quality. Harvard Business Review, 66, 3
(1988), 63-73.
19. Huh, Y.U.; Keller, F.R.; Redman, T.C.; and Watkins, A.R. Data quality. Information and
Software Technology, 32, 8 (1990), 559-565.
20. Ives, B.; Olson, M.H.; and Baroudi, J.J. The measurement of user information satisfac-
tion. Communications of the ACM, 26,10 (1983), 785-793.
21. Johnson, J.R.; Leitch, R.A.; and Neter, J. Characteristics of errors in accounts receivable
and inventory audits. Accounting Review, 56,2 (1981), 270-293.
22. Juran, J.M. Juran on Leadership for Quality: An Executive Handbook. New York: The
Free Press, 1989.
23. Juran, J.M., and Gryna, F.M. Quality Planning and Analysis, 2d ed. New York: McGraw-
Hill, 1980.
24. Knechel, W.R. A simulation model for evaluating accounting systems reliability. Audit-
ing: A Journal of Theory and Practice, 4, 2 (1985), 38.-62.
25. Knechel, W.R. The use of quantitative models in the review and evaluation of intemai
control: a survey andreviev/. Journal of Accounting Literature, 2 (1983), 205-219.
26. Kotler, P. Marketing Essentials.Eng\ewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1984.
27. Kriebel, C.H. Evaluating the quality of information systems. In N. Szysperski and E.
Grochla (eds.). Design and Implementation of Computer Based Information Systems. German-
town, PA: SijthtoffandNoordhoff, 1979.
28. Laudon, K.C. Data quality and due process in large interorganizational record systems.
Communications of the ACM, 29, \ {\ 986), 4-11.
29. Madnick, S. Integrating information from global systems: dealing with the "on- and
off-ramps" of the infomiation superhighway. Journal ofOrganizationat Computing, 5,2 (1995),
69-82.
30. Melone, N. A theoretical assessment of the user-satisfaction construct in information
systems research. A/a/iageme«/Scf'ewce, 36, 1 (1990), 598-613.
31. Moore, G.C., and Benbasat, 1. Development of an instrument to measure the perceptions
of adopting an information technology innovation. Information Systems Research, 2, 3 (1991),
192-222.
32. Morey, R.C. Estimating and improving the quality of information in the MiS. Commu-
nications of the ACM, 25, 5 (1982), 337-342.
33. Page, W., and Kaomea, P. Using quality attributes to produce optimal tactical informa-
tion. In Proceedings of the Fourth Annual Workshop on Information Technologies and Systems
(WITS). Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada: 1994, pp. 145-154.
34. Redman, T.C. Data Quality: Management and Technology. New York: Bantam Books, 1992.
35. Ronen, B., and Spiegler, I. Information as inventory: a new conceptual view. Information
and Management, 21, (1991), 239-247.
36. Sciore, E.; Siegel, M.; and Rosenthal, A. Using semantic values to facilitate interoperabil-
ity among heterogeneous information systems. .4 GVf Transactions on Database Systems, 19, 2
(1994), 254-290.
37. Stevens, J. Applied multivariate statistics for the social science. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence
Erlbaum, 1986.
38. Strong, D.M. Decision support for exception handling and quality control in office
operations. Decision Support Systems, 8, 3 (1992), 217-227.
39. Strong, D.M.; Lee, Y.W.; and Wang, R.Y. Data quality in context. Forthcoming, 1996.
40. Strong, D.M., and Miller, S.M. Exceptions and exception handling in computerized
information processes. ACM Transactions on Information Systems, 13, 2 (1995), 206—233.
41. Tan, J.K., and Benbasat, I. Processing of graphical information: a decomposition taxon-
omy to match data extraction tasks and graphical representations. Information Systems Re-
search, 7,4(1990), 416^39.

--- PAGE 21 ---
BEYOND ACCURACY: DATA QUALITY 25
42. Wand, Y., and Wang, R.Y. Anchoring data quality dimensions in ontological founda-
tions. Communications of the ACM, forthcoming, 1996.
43. Wang, R.Y., and Kon, H.B. Towards total data quality management (TDQM). In R.Y.
Wang (ed.), Information Technology in Action: Trends and Perspectives. Englewood Cliffs,
NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1993.
44. Wang, R.Y.; Kon, H.B.; and Madnick, S.E. Data quality requirements analysis and
modeling. In Proceedings ofthe 9th International Conference on Data Engineering, Vienna,
1993, pp. 670-677.
45. Wang, R.Y.; Reddy, M.P.; and Kon, H.B. Toward quality data: an attribute-based
approach. Decision Support Systems (DSS), 13, 1995 (1995), 349-372.
46. Wang, R.Y.; Storey, V.C; and Firth, C.P. A framework for analysis of data quality
research. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering, 7, 4 (1995), 623-640.
47. Wang, R.Y.; Strong, D.M.; and Guarascio, L.M. An empirical investigation of data
quality dimensions: a data consumer's perspective. Total Data Quality Management (TDQM)
Research Program, MIT Sloan School ofManagement, no. TDQM-93-12,1993.
48. Wang, Y.R., and Madnick, S.E. A polygen model for heterogeneous database systems:
the source tagging perspective. In Proceedings ofthe 16th International Conference on Very
Large Data Bases (VLDB), Brisbane, Australia, 1990, pp. 519-538.
49. Yu, S., and Neter, J. A stochastic model of the intemal control system. Journal of
Accounting Research, 1, 3 (1973), 273-295.
APPENDIX A: First Data Quality Survey Questionnaire
Side One
Position Prior to Attending the University (circle one): Finance Marketing Operations
Personnel IT Other
Industry you worked in the previous job:
When you think of data quality, what attributes other than timeliness, accuracy,
availability, and interpretability come to mind? Please list as many as possible!
PLEASE FILL OUT THIS SIDE BEFORE TURNING OVER. THANK YOU!!
Side Two
The following is a list of attributes developed for data quality:
Completeness Flexibility Adaptability Reliability
Relevance Reputation Compatibility Ease of Use
Ease of Update Ease of Maintenance Format Cost
Integrity Breadth Depth Correctness
Well-documented Habit Variety Content
Dependability Manipulability Preoiseness Redundancy
Ease of Access Convenience Accessibility Data Exchange
Understandable Credibility Importance Critical
After reviewing this list, do any other attributes come to mind?
THANK YOU!

--- PAGE 22 ---
26 RICHARD Y. WANG AND DIANE M. STRONG
APPENDIX B: Second Data Quality Survey Questionnaire
Thank you for participating in this study. All responses will be held in strictest
confidence.
Industry:
Job Title:
Department: Finance Marketing/Sales Operations Human Resources Accounting
Infomiation Systems Planning Other
The following is a list of adjectives and phrases which describes corporate data.
When answering the questions, please think about the intemal data such as sales,
production, financial, and employee data that you work with or use to make decisions
in your job.
We apologize for the tedious nature ofthe survey. Although the questions may seem
repetitive, your response to each question is critical to the success ofthe study. Please
give us the first response that comes to mind and try to use the FULL scale range
available.
Section I: How important is it to you that your data are:
Accurate
Believable
Complete
Concise
Verifiable
Well-documented
Understandable
Well-presented
Up-to-date
Accessible
Adaptable
Aesthetically Pleasing
Compactly
Represented
Important
Consistently Formatted
Dependable
Retrievable
Manipulable
Objective
Usable
Well-organized
Transportable/Portable
Unambiguous
Correct
Relevant
Flexible
Flawless
Comprehensive
Consistently
Represented
Interesting
Extremely important
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
1 2
1 2
1 2
1 2
1 2
1 2
t 2
t 2
1 2
1 2
1 2
1 2
1 2
1 2
1 2
1 2
1 2
1 2
1 2
1 2
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
Important
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5CJl
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5CJl
5
5
5
5
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
Not important at al
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9

--- PAGE 23 ---
BEYOND ACCURACY: DATA QUALITY 27
Unbiased
Familiar
Interpretable
Applicable
Robust
Available
Revealing
Reviewable
Expandable
Time Independent
Error-free
Efficient
User-friendly
Specific
Well-formatted
Reliable
Convenient
Extendable
Critical
Well-defined
Reusable
Clear
Cost-effective
Auditable
Precise
Readable
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
Section II: How important
Easily Aggregated
Easily Accessed
Easily Compared to
Past Data
Easily Changed
Easily Questioned
Easily
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
is it to
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
5
5
5
5
5
5CJI
5
5
5
5
5
5CJI
5CJICJI
5
5CJI
5
5
5
5
5
5
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
you that your data can be:
Extremely important
1
1
1
1
1
1
Downloaded/Uploaded
Easily Joined with
Other Data
Easily Updated
Easily Understood
Easily Maintained
Easily Retrieved
Easily Customized
Easily Reproduced
Easily Traced
Easily Sorted
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
Important
5CJI
5
5
5
5
5CJI
5
5
5CJI
5CJlCJI
Section III: How important are the following to you?
Extremely important
Data are certified error-1
free
Data improve efficiency 1
Data aive vou a 1
2
2
2
3
3
3
4
4
4
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
Important
5
5CJI
6
6
6
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
Not important at all
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
Not important at all
7
7
7
8
8
8
9
9
9
competitive edge

--- PAGE 24 ---
28 RICHARD Y. WANG AND DIANE M. STRONG
Data cannot be
accessed by
competitors
Data contain adequate
detail
Data are in finalized
form
Data contain no
redundancy
Data are of proprietary
nature
Data can be
personalized
Data are not easily
corrupted
Data meet all of your
requirements
Data add value to your
operations
Data are continuously
collected
Data continuously
presented in same
format
Data are compatible
with previous data
Data are not
ovenvhelming
Data can be easily
integrated
Data can be used for
multiple purposes
Data are secure
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
Section IV: How important are the following to you?
The source of the data
is clear
Errors can be easily
identified
The cost of data
collection
The cost of data
accuracy
The form of
presentation
The format of the data
The scope of
information contained
in data
The depth of
information contained
in data
The breadth of
information contained
in data
Extremely important
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
Important
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
Not important at all
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9

--- PAGE 25 ---
BEYOND ACCURACY: DATA QUALITY 29
Quality of resolution
The storage medium
The reputation of the
data source
The reputation of the
data
The age of the data
The amount of data
You have used the
data before
Someone has ciear
responsibility for data
The data entry process
is self-correcting
The speed of access to
data
The speed of
operations performed
on data
The amount and type
of storage required
You have little
extraneous data
present
You have a variety of
data and data sources
You have optimal data
for your purpose
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
The integrity of the data 1
It is easy to tell if the
data are updated
1
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4
5
5CJlCJl
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
5CJl
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
6
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
7
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
8
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
APPENDIX C: Descriptive Statistics for Attributes
Attribute
Accurate
Believable
Complete
Concise
Verifiable
Weii-documented
Understandable
Well-presented
Up-to-date
Accessible
Adaptable
Aesthetically Pleasing
Compactly Represented
Important
Consistently Formatted
Dependable
Retrievable
Manipulable
Objective
No. of
cases
350
348
349
348
348
349
349
350
350
349
344
350
349
335
347
349
350
349
345
Mean
1.771
2.707
3.229
3.994
3.224
4.123
2.668
3.937
2.963
3.370
4.942
6.589
5.123
3.824
4.594
2.648
3.660
4.327
3.551
S.D.
1.135
1.927
1.814
2.016
1.854
2.087
1.671
2.124
1.732
1.899
2.042
2.085
2.181
2.138
2.141
1.615
1.999
2.162
1.963
Min
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
Max
7
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9

--- PAGE 26 ---
30 RICHARD Y. WANG AND DIANE M. STRONG
Data give you a
competitive edge
Data cannot be accessed
by competitors
Data contain adequate
detail
Data are in finalized form
Data contain no
redundancy
Data are of proprietary
nature
Data can be personalized
Data are not easily
corrupted
Data meet all of your
requirements
Data add value to your
operations
Data are continuously
collected
Data continuously
presented in same format
Data are compatible with
previous data
Data are not overwhelming
Data can be easily
integrated
Data can be used for
multiple purposes
Data are secure
The source of the data is
clear
Errors can be easily
identified
The cost of data collection
The cost of data accuracy
The form of presentation
The format of the data
The scope of information
contained in data
The depth of information
contained in data
The breadth of information
contained in data
Quality of resolution
The storage medium
The reputation of the data
source
The reputation of the data
The age of the data
The amount of data
You have used the data
before
Someone has clear
responsibility for data
The data entry process is
self-correcting
348
347
348
348
344
346
345
344
348
349
347
346
348
347
348
347
349
350
347
349
348
349
348
345
345
344
329
348
348
347
350
347
345
347
344
3.178
4.450
3.057
5.575
6.279
5.867
5.759
3.741
3.664
2.479
4.608
4.627
3.578
4.037
4.086
4.565
4.456
3.291
3.089
4.304
4.261
4.794
4.917
3.838
3.922
3.872
5.024
6.534
4.144
3.925
3.640
5.009
6.107
3.744
4.695
2.277
2.760
1.378
2.201
2.026
2.612
2.390
2.162
2.123
1.708
2.443
2.232
1.893
2.306
1.896
2.304
2.432
1.836
1.584
2.180
2.169
1.994
2.045
1.726
1.835
1.796
1.995
2.148
2.172
2.133
2.044
2.125
2.228
2.271
2.362
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
9
9
8
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
8
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9

--- PAGE 27 ---
BEYOND ACCURACY: DATA QUALITY 31
The speed of access to 347
data
The speed of operations 348
performed on data
The amount and type of 349
storage required
You have little extraneous 345
data present
You have a variety of data 344
and data sources
You have optimal data for 345
your purpose
The integrity of the data 345
It is easy to tell if the data 348
are updated
Easy to exchange data 346
with others
Access to data can be 347
restricted
APPENDIX D: The Two-Phase Sorting Study
3.934
4.687
6.209
5.797
4.712
3.554
2.371
3.609
4.945
4.988
1.992
2.194
2.030
2.003
2.234
2.126
1.571
1.926
2.311
2.514
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
9
DI: Instruction and Content for Phase 1
Instruction 1
Group the 20 data quality dimensions into several categories (between 3 and 5) where
the dimensions within each category in your opinion represent similar attributes of
high-quality data. (Note: A data quality dimension may also be isolated into its own
category if you see fit to do so.)
Example 3x5 Card
BELIEVABILITY
The extent to which data are accepted or regarded as true, real, and credible.
(1)
Content ofthe Remaining Nineteen 3x5 Dimension Cards
2. VALUE-ADDED: The extent to which data are beneficial and provide advan-
tages from their use.
3. RELEVANCY: The extent to which data are applicable and helpful for the
task at hand.
4. ACCURACY: The extent to which data are correct, reliable, and certified free
of error.
5. INTERPRETABILITY: The extent to which data are in appropriate language
and units and the data definitions are clear.

--- PAGE 28 ---
32 RICHARD Y. WANG AND DIANE M. STRONG
6. EASE OF UNDERSTANDING: The extent to which data are clear without
ambiguity and easily comprehended.
7. ACCESSIBILITY: The extent to which data are available or easily and quickly
retrievable.
8. OBJECTIVITY: The extent to which data are unbiased (unprejudiced) and
impartial.
9. TIMELINESS: The extent to which the age ofthe data is appropriate for the
task at hand.
10. COMPLETENESS: The extent to which data are of sufficient breadth, depth,
and scope for the task at hand.
11. TRACEABILITY: The extent to which data are well documented, verifiable,
and easily attributed to a source.
12. REPUTATION: The extent to which data are tmsted or highly regarded in
terms of their source or content.
13. REPRESENTATIONAL CONSISTENCY: The extent to which data are always
presented in the same format and are compatible with previous data.
14. COST-EFFECTIVENESS: The extent to which the cost of collecting appropri-
ate data is reasonable.
15. EASE OF OPERATION: The extent to which data are easily managed and
manipulated (i.e., updated, moved, aggregated, reproduced, customized).
16. VARIETY OF DATA AND DATA SOURCES: The extent to which data are
available from several differing data sources.
17. CONCISE: The extent to which data are compactly represented without being
overwhelming (i.e., brief in presentation, yet complete and to the point).
18. ACCESS SECURITY: The extent to which access to data can be restricted and
hence kept secure.
19. APPROPRIATE AMOUNT OF DATA: The extent to which the quantity or
volume of available data is appropriate.
20. FLEXIBILITY: The extent to which data are expandable, adaptable, and easily
applied to other needs.
Instruction 2
Label the categories that you have created with an overall definition (word or
two/three-word phrase) that best describes/summarizes the data quality dimensions
within each category.
D2: Instruction and Content for Phase 2
Instruction
Group each ofthe data quality dimensions into one ofthe following four categories.
In case of conflict, choose the best-fitting category for the dimension. All dimensions
must be categorized.

--- PAGE 29 ---
BEYOND ACCURACY: DATA QUALITY 33
Content ofthe Four 3x5 Category Cards
Category J: The extent to which data values are in conformance with the actual
or true values.
Category 2: The extent to which data are applicable to or pertain to the task of
the data user.
Category 3: The extent to which data are presented in an intelligible and clear
manner.
Category 4: The extent to which data are available or obtainable.

--- PAGE 30 ---
[No extractable text on this page]