--- PAGE 1 ---
IT MANAGEMENT

“The prudent management of IT has emerged as an essential element
for corporate success. Weill and Ross have written a compelling guide
for non-technical executives that clearly explains how top-performing
compunies make and manage IT investments that deliver winning
results.”

—Michael Fleisher, Chairman and CEO, Gartner, Inc.

“IT faces tremendous pressure to deliver tangible and sustained value.
Executives must address five key decisions to assure effective gover-
nance and predictable results, In this book, Weill and Ross distill
insight from the successes and failures of numerous organizations to
help you improve your decision making and recognize the patterns
{hat lead to overall business success. Can you describe your IT gover-
nance? Will your peers describe it similarly’? Not sure? Then you need
this great resource to imprint effective governance throughout your
organization.”

—Shafeen Charania, Director of Business Value,
Microsoft Corporation

“Brilliant, insightful, and actionable: a breakthrough framework. A

must-read for all CIOs and senior executives who want to gencrate

real strategic value from their information technology invesuments.”
Andre Spatz, Chief Information Officer, UNICEF

“IT Governance is thorough, perceptive, and packed with real-life
examples, Weill and Ross find that good technology governance
to better business results, Many C1Os in large firms will hope their
company’s CEO takes this book with him on the next plane ride.”
—Stephen Norman, Chief Technology
Officer, Merrill Lynch

ads

ISBN 1.59199-253-5

i

9

Wwww.HBSPress.org

Top Performers
Manage IT
Decision Rights for -
Superior Results =

HARVARD BUSINESS SCHOO

--- PAGE 2 ---
IT Governance

--- PAGE 3 ---
Also by Peter Weill

Leveraging the New Infrastructure
(vith Marianne Broadbent)
Harvard Business School Press, 1998,

Place to Space
(vith Michael Vitale)
Harvard Business School Press, 2000

IT Governance

How Top Performers
Manage IT Decision Rights
for Superior Results

Peter Weill and
Jeanne W. Ross

HARVARD BUSINESS SCHOOL PRESS.
BOSTON, MASSACHUSETTS

--- PAGE 4 ---
Copytight © 2004 Peter Weill andl Jeanne W, Ross
All rights reserved
rinted in the United States of America
08 07 0605S

No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in, or Introduced
into a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any fort, or by any means
(electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise), without
he prior permission of the publisher, Requests for permission should
be directed to permissions@hbsp.barvard.edu, o¢ mailed to
Permissions, Harvard Business School Publishing, 60 Harvard Way,
Boston, Massachusetts 02163,

Library of Congress (
‘Weill, Peter,

TT governance : how top performers manage I’ decision rights for

superior results / Peter Weill andl Jeanne W, Koss,
p.m.

Includes bibliographical references and index.

ISBN 1-59139.253.5

L. Information technology—Manayement, 1. Ross, Jeanne W.
1H. Title,

H1D80.2.494495 2004

658.41038-—de22

taloging-in-Publication Data

2003025726

‘The paper used in this publication meets the minimum requirements
of the American National Standard for Information Sciences—Permanence
1 Paper for Printed Library Materials, ANSI 239.48-1992,

Contents

Prefiace and Acknowledgments vil

L. 1 Governance Simultaneously Fmpowers and Controls 1

2. Five Key I Decisions: Making (1a Strategic Asset

3. IT Governance Archetypes for Allocating Decision Rights

4, Mechanisms for Implementing IT Governance 85

5, What IT Governance Works Best 17

6, Linking Strategy, IT Governance, and Performance a7

7, Government and Not-for-Profit Organizations 185

8, Leadership Principles for [ Governance ais
Appendix A: Research Sites 237
Appenulix B: Measuring Governance Performance 239
Notes 24t
Iraex

About the Authors 265

--- PAGE 5 ---
Preface and Acknowledgments

IP's HARD TO PINPOINT when the importance of information
technology (IT) governance became clear to us. It wasn't like a bolt
of lightning that struck and left us first stunned but then seeing.
more clearly. Rather, gradually over a period of years, involving
hundreds of conversations with managers and multiple research
studies, we became convinced that IT governance is the most im-
Portant factor in generating business value from IT, Our convie-
tion—slow to develop but now heartfelt—is that IT governance can
actually deliver on the longtime management paradox of encourag-
ing and leveraging the ingenuity of all the enterprise's people while
ensuring compliance with the overall vision and principles,

Although this book is about IT governance, we place I’ in an
organizational context as one of the six key assets (human, finan-
cial, physical, intellectual property, IT, and relationships) that must
be governed to create value. Too often books and discussions focus
on one piece of the organizational puzzle. Value comes from in-
tegrating the enterprise's key assets. ‘That said, to be practical and
limit the book to only one volume, we focus on providing con-
cepts, frameworks, and lessons from top-performing enterprises on
how to get more value from their IT investments via better IT’ gov-
emance in the firm’s strategic context.

Unsuccessful quests for business value from IT olten exasperate
senior business managers. For five years, the MIT Sloan School of
Management Center for Information Systems Research has pre-
sented thrice-annual programs for non-IT executives struggling to

--- PAGE 6 ---
manuye IT better, In this program we address capable business exec-
tives who recognize that they cannot hand off responsibility for
IT value to their IT units, Typically, they are concemed officers of
an enterprise (CEO, CFO, COO, and other senior managers) look-
ing for practical guidelines for what they can do tomorrow to im-
prove their returns from TT investments. The more than one thou-
sand executives who have attended this course often feel frustrated,
insecure, bewildered, and even angry about the high cost of IT and
its limited measurable benefits, One executive implored: “What can
1 do? I don’t understand IT well enough to manage it. My IT people
work hard but there is a disconnect somehow . . . with the real busi-
ness I manage. They don’t feel my pain.” This book is designed for
these executives and the ClOs and other IT professionals who will
work together to generate increasingly strategic benefits from IT.

IT governance is an idea whose time has come. Information
and IT are the least understood of the key assets in the enterprise.
With the huge growth of IT spending in enterprises and the strong
evidence that significant bottom line premiums reward better IT
decision making, it is time to make IT governance more profes-
sional, There has been little field-based research on IT governance,
and lew publications help managers understand the issues involved
in designing effective governance structures and processes. Our
objective in writing this book was to addresses that gap.

Looking ahead, the influence of IT on enterprise performance
will continue to grow. Whether an enterprise Is focused on effi-
ciency, innovation, growth, customer responsiveness, or business
integration, IT has become an essential ingredient for business
competitiveness, IT supports standardized process components,
shared knowledge, instantaneous communications, and electronic
linkages—the foundations for new business strategies. In an envi-
ronment demanding faster responses and increasing agility, man-
agement teams must ensure that IT is an enabler of, not an obstacle
to, organizational change.

The Research

‘The insights here come from a series of research projects exploring
IT governance in more than three hundred enterprises in over
twenty countries during the period 1999-2003. Most of the re-

SELLS EDI aoe

search was done at the MIT Sloan School of Management Center
for Information Systems Research (CISR). The research consisted of
three main studies:

1. A CISR study (2001-2003) led by Peter Weill of how enter-
prises govern IT, which provided the framework for the
book. We studied 256 enterprises spanning the Americas,
Europe, and Asia Pacific, and conducted several in-depth
case studies. We studied who had input to and who held
decision rights for five key IT decisions, We also measured
governance and financial performance and the effectiveness
of the mechanisms used to implement governance, The
study and survey was designed at CISR. Marianne Broadbent
and her colleagues at Gartner created an interactive Web site
(during 2002) and facilitated distribution of the survey elec-
tronically and on paper to ClOs of Gartner EXP member
enterprises and other organizations who attend CISR pro-
gtams. Gartner also contributed to the research by conduct-
ing ten case studies on IT governance,

2. Forty case studies developed for a series of CISR research
projects (1999-2003) led by Jeanne Ross. The cases explored
the relationship between TT architecture and busines strat-
egy and identified governance issues associated with IT and
organizational change efforts. Firms in the studies were
building IT architectures as part of ERP implementations,
€-business initiatives, Y2K remediation, and business trans-
formations. CISR research team members included Peter
Weill, Richard Woodham, Natalia Levina, George Wester-
man, and Nils Fonstad. Michael Vitale, then at the Univer-
sity of Melbourne, also participated in the case research
David Robertson at [MD in Switzerland contributed ten
European cases, including ING Direct and Panalpina, which,
provided the background for some of our vignettes.

A number of related projects, including:

+ ACISR study (2001) by Jeanne Ross, Cynthia Beath,
(University of Texas), and Mani Subramani (University
of Minnesota) involving interviews of thirty CIOs to
explore IT management practices.

--- PAGE 7 ---
x Preface and Acknowledgments

«An exploratory study of IT governance (1998-1999) by
Peter Weill and Michael Vitale at the Melbourne Business
School.

+ An examination of IT governance arrangements and perfor
mance of twenty-four Fortuyte LOO firms at MIT CISR (2000)
by Peter Weill and Richard Woodham, using data collected
as part of “Justifying and Funding IT Infrastructure,” the
Results Research Project ITI, The Concours Group.

Who Should Read This Book

We wrote this book for all executives who have ever celebrated,
worried about, or cursed IT—including ClOs. We discuss the roles
f senior business and If managers in fostering effective and em
powering use of IT through IT governance. The language, style,
data, examples, and lessons concern business issues that rely on
technology, We discuss the strategic governance decisions with
enough detail to guide implementation of governance mecha:
rnisms~—the structures and processes that make governance happen.
‘We encourage senior managers, operational managers, murketingy
managers, financial managers, and IY managers to read this book
and take responsibility for IT governance design and implementa-
tion in their enterprises.

People We Would Like to Thank

We gratefully acknowledge the support of CISR's patron and spon
sor firms at the time of writing:

Accenture, Aetna Inc,, Allstate Insurance Co., Banknorth N.A.,
Campbell Soup Co., Celanese, DiamondCluster International Ine.,
Det Norske Veritas , EMC Corp., Freddie Mac, Gartner, The Gillette
Co., The Guardian Life Insurance Co. of America, Intel Corp.,
Hewlett-Packard Company, IBM Corporation, International Finance
Corp., Marsh Inc., Merrill Lynch & Co, Inc., MetLife, Mitsubishi
Corp., Microsoft Corporation, Mohegan Sun, National Kidney Foun-
dation (Singapore), Nomura Research Institute Ltd, Ortho Biotech,
Products L.P, Pfizer Inc., PEPC Inc., Raytheon, Qwest Communica-

Preface and Acknowledgments xi

tions, State Street Corporation, and TRW Inc, Executives {rom these
firms not only inform and fund our research, they probe our as-
sumptions, test our ideas, debate our findings, and implement and
improve our work.

During research and writing we have had the opportunity to
work with many extraordinary managers and academic colleagues.
who have influenced our thinking and reinforced our passions. First
we would like to acknowledge the managers who shared their
insights and in many cases provided the examples for the book.
These managers included John Fiore and Joe Antonellis at State
Street, Steve Sheinheit at MetLife, Doreen Wright at Campbell Soup,
Steve Brown at Carlson Companies, Mike Eskew and Ken Lacy at
UPS, Martin Vonk at ING Direct, Monika Ribae at Panalpina, Andre
Spatz at UNICLE Ron Carter at Pfizer, Jim McGrane at Mead.
Westvaco, Joe Adamski at Barwon Water, Jim Venglarik at JPMorgan
Chase, Bill Kitkey at DuPont, Robbie Higgins at Motorola, and Steve
Yates at USAA, Frank Brbrick at McKinsey and Charlie Feld at Feld
Associates enlightened us about enterprise architecture and its
implications for TT governance, Appendix A lists companies that
participated in the research, We want to acknowledge all the mane
agers who participated in case study interviews, as well as the 250%
10s who took the time to answer our survey questions about IT
governance and add their own insights and further questions. We
are grateful to all of them for making this book possible,

A number of people provided important feedback on the man-
uscript and research insights including Ken Cooke and Michael
Brook at PriceWaterhouseCoopers, John Sviokla at DiamondCluster
International, Ine,, and Tony Scott at GM. ‘thanks also to the many
executives who made comments during our presentations or came
up afterward to share their insights and criticisms

We are especially grateful to Marianne Broadbent and her col-
leagues at Gartner for participating and for contributing case stud-
Jes, talent, and insights to the project, We also want to acknowl
exlge Shafeen Charania of Microsoft for his thought-provoking
discussions and comments on the manuscript and his strong adwo-
cacy of applying IT value research to practice.

Susie Lee, Francisco Gonzéle-Meza Hoffmann, Chris Foglia,
and Richard Woodham—all researchers at CISR—did most of the

--- PAGE 8 ---
xii Preface and Acknowledgments

detailed and painstaking quantitative analysis and data manage-
ment for this book. Individually and together as a team they added
precision, professionalism, collegiality, and insight. We thank them.

During the manuscript development, we received tremendous
support from our colleagues at CISR and the Sloan School,
Fitzgerald II] adoitly managed the production process; he devised
the template, policed version control, tracked down references, for-
matted text, designed graphics, checked for inconsistencies, and
kept us on schedule. We appreciate not only: his professionalism
but also his dedication and good humor. Chris Fogtia contributed
wide-ranging skills including project management, data analy:
and proofreading. She proved, once again, to be the model center
manager. Julie Coiro took on extra duties to keep CISR cunning
smoothly and to keep us all sane, We also appreciate the interest,
ideas, and collegiality of our CISR research colleagues Chuck Gib-
son, Jack Rockarl, George Westerman, Sinan Aral, and Nils Fonstad.
They have influenced our thinking and made C1SR both personally
and professionally a great place to work.

CISR is a research center in the Sloan School of Management at
MIT, We feel very fortunate to work in such a rich and exciting re-
search environment. We have benefited, in particular, from the
strong support, friendship and encouragement of Dean Don Les-
sard, whose responsibilities include research centers, as well as Area
Head Professor Wanda Orlikowski and IT Group Head Professor
Tom Malone.

We fcel fortunate to have worked with Carol Franco and Kirsten
Sandberg at Harvard Business School Press. Kirsten ay our editor
championed the book and improved our work greatly by challeng-
ing both big ideas and specific text and keeping us focused on the
main message.

Working together on this book has been a wonderful opportu-
nity for us to combine the insights of many years of IT manage-
ment and value research. We have collaborated on a number of
projects—sometimes while on separate continents—and this work
combines both joint and independent research. We have fre-
quently applied different methodologies to similar questions, lead-
ing to Ticher, occasionally contradictory findings and ultimately
lively debates. In writing this manuscript we found enormous satis-

Preface and Acknowledgments ail

faction in the process of bringing together our different skills, chal-
lenging our assertions, and learning together. For both of us it has
been an inspiring and joyful partnership.

Personal Note from Peter

I want to dedicate this book to Margi Olson, my wife and mate,
who managed to be supportive, insightful, and delightful despite
observing that every organizational issue we discussed in the last
year was, in my eyes at least, a governance problem

T hope the M.B.A. and other master’s students in my Sloan
School courses recognize their input into this book. I thank them
all as they contributed much in the way of learning, clarity, and
focus during the countless discussions in and out of class.

I would like to acknowledge John Alford of the Melbourne Busi=
ness School at the University of Melbourne who educated me about
management in the public sector and provided helpful input to
chapter 7. { would also like to acknowledge Erik Brynjolfsson at the
Sloan School of Management for the many helpful and collegial
discussions about I’ value, And a warm thank-you to Mike Vitale at
the Australian Graduate School of Management, We worked to-
gether on IT’ governance in 1998, trying to understand why IT gov-
ernance was important and how it could be done well.

‘To my new godson, James Quinn Diamond: Welcome to the
world, and | hope you grow up to be just like your parents; I Look.
forward to participating. Thanks, as always, to my mum who is
brave and loving. And thanks to my brother Steve, as well as to
Lois, David, and Simon, who together complete my family and ate
always loving and supportive,

Personal Note from Jeanne

My acknowledgments must start with my parents, who raised
independent-thinking girls before it was fashionable to do so. | am
enormously grateful for their love and encouragement. { also want
to thank Pat, Jo, Barb and Mark, Russ and Diane, and Dave and Jill
for being really cool siblings, I treasure our moments together

--- PAGE 9 ---
xiv Preface and Acknowledgments

‘hanks to my friend and neighbor Janet Helgeson for sharing
her enthusiasm for life and for keeping the garden green while |
‘was writing, and to Ann Little, Cindy Crimmin, and Peggy Berko
for their ongoing friendship despite distance and distractions. | am.
grateful to Cynthia Beath, Carol Brown, and Mike Vitale for long.
discussions that have stimulated and sustained my passion for re-
search. | am also grateful to Kate Kaiser for getting me started and.
keeping me going. And a special thank-you to Jack Rockart for be-
lieving in me and teaching me how to do’ what I do—I couldn't
have had a better role mocel.

I want to thank my children—Adam, Julie, and Steffie—for
bringing sheer delight into my life in ways that no professi
pursuit can approach, I marvel at what wonderful people you are.
Finally, { want to thank my husband and best friend, Dan, who, for
twenty-six years, has encouraged me to pursue my goals in spite of
the added burden it places on him. He has become an unwitting IT
expert through his careful editing and patient listening. T dedicate
this book to Dan, whose unwavering love and support are the best
explanation for my extraordinarily happy life

nal

Peter Weill
Jeanne Ross

IT Governance

--- PAGE 10 ---
|

IT Governance
Simultaneously
Empowers and Controls

DO YOUR information technology (11) capabilities enhance your
competitiveness? Do managers throughout your organization recog-
nize their responsibilities for the effective management and use of
Tor do they assume that the IT department will manage IT? Do
your IT investments target enterprisewide strategic priorities—or
does your firm squander resources on diverse tactical initiatives? Sim-
ply put, are you getting acceptable value from your IT investments?

Firms manage many assets—people, money, plant, and cus-
tomer relationships—but information and the technologies that
collect, store, and disseminate information may be the assets that
perplex them the most. Business needs constantly change, while
systems, once in place, remain relatively rigid. IT implementations
involve both up-front and ongoing investments for outcomes that
no one can precisely predict. These uncertainties and complexities
lead many managers to abdicate their responsibilities for ensuring
that their people use IT effectively.

For many years, some organizations could succeed despite weak
IT management practices. But information—and consequently IT—
is an increasingly important element of organizational products
and services and the foundation of enterprisewide processes. The
tight linkage between IT and organizational processes means that

--- PAGE 11 ---
2 Ie GOVERNANCE

the TT unit cannot bear sole—or even primary—responsibility for the
effective use of information and information technology. Getting
more value from IT is an incteasingly important organizational
competency. Leaders throughout an enterprise must develop this
competency.

Our research shows that top-performing enterprises generate
returns on their [T' investments up to 40 percent greater than theit
competitors.’ These top-performing enterprises proactively seek
value from IT in a variety of ways:

+ ‘They clarity business strategies and the role of IT in achiev-
ing them,

+ ‘They measure and manage the amount spent on and the
value received from IT,

© They assign accountability for the organizational changes
required to benefit {rom new IT capabilities,

© ‘They learn from each Implementation, becoming more
adept at sharing and reusing IT asset

‘Top-performing enterprises succeed where others fail by imple:
menting effective IT governance Lo support their strategies, For ex-
ample, firs with above-average IT governance following a specific
strategy (for example, customer intimacy) had more than 20 per=
cent higher profits than firms with poor governance following the
same strategy.” We define IT governance as specifying the decision
rights and accountability framework to encourase desirable behavior in
using IT. IT governance is not about making specific IP decisions—
management does thit—but rather determines who systematically
makes and contributes to those decisions. IT governance reflects
broader corporate governance principles while focusing on the
management and use of IT to achieve corporate performance goals.
Effective IT governance encourages and leverages the ingenuity of
the enterprise's people in IT usage ancl ensures compliance with the
enterprise's overall vision and values, This book is intended to alert
both business and [Y unit executives to the critical role they play in
defining IT governance processes—a tole that ultimately deter-
mines how much value the enterprise receives from IT.

All enterprises have IT governance. ‘Those with effective gover-
hance have actively designed a set of IT governance mechanisms

TT Governance Simultanconsly Eonpowers and Cantos 3

(committees, budgeting processes, approvals, and so on) that en-
courage behavior consistent with the organization’s mission, strat-
egy, values, norms, and culture. In these enterprises, I can factor
significantly into competitive strategy. For example, David Spina,
CEO of Slate Street Corporation, a world leader in global investor
services, defined the firm’s corporate vision in 2001 as “One State
Street.” This vision shifted the focus of the enterprise from the indi«
vidual accomplishments of business units such as investment re-
search and management, trading and brokerage services, and fund
accounting and custodial services, to the fimwide demands of the
customer, Desirable behaviors changed to include optimization of
enterprisewicle as well as business unit objectives, State Street estab-
lished and celined a set of governance mechanisms, including en=
terprisewide IT budgeting and an Office of IT Architecture, to
encourage the new behaviors."

In contrast, enterprises that govern IT by default more often
find that IT can sabotage business strategy. One financial services
firm was pursuing a cost reduction strategy. Rather than. create a
comprehensive set of mechanisms that would encourage cost sav-
ing, this firm relied on a new chargeback system to curtail demand
for IT services, When the chargeback system led to bickering
among If and business managers, the ClO assigned relationship
managers to restore internal customer satisfaction. They improved
satisfaction scores but did not lower IV or business process costs,
Without a cohesive ( governance design, enterprises must rely on
their CIOs to ameliorate problems through tactical solutions rather
than position Ii’ as a strategic asset.

To understand IT value creation, we studied Il governance
in over 250 multibusiness unit for-profit and not-for-profit entet=
prises in twenty-three countries in the Americas, Europe, and Asia
Pacific (see appendix A). Our research revealed that top-performing
enterprises governed IT differently than did other enterprises.
Mindful of competing internal forces, the top perlormers designed
governance structures linked to the performance measure on which
they excelled (for example, growth or return on assets), thereby
harmonizing business objectives, yovernance approach, gover-
nance mechanisms, and performance goals and metrics. ‘The net
effect: Good governance design allows enterprises to deliver supe-
rior resulls on their IY investments. We conclude that effective £1

--- PAGE 12 ---
4 IT GOVERNANCE

governance is the single most important predictor of the value an organi-
zation generates from IT.

What Is Governance?

Before we dive into IT governance, we must look at the broader issue
of corporate governance in enterprises. Corporate governance be-
came a dominant business topic in the wake of the spate of corpo-
rate scandals of midyear 2002—Enron, Worldcom, and Tyco, to
name a few. Interest in corporate governance is not new, but the se-
verity of the financial impacts of these scandals undermined the
confidence of both the institutional and the individual investor and
heightened concerns about the ability and resolve of private enter-
prises to protect their stakeholders. ‘The crisis in confidence in the
corporate sector contributed to the downward pressure on stock
prices worldwide and particularly in the United States. in the first six
months of 2002 the S&P 500 fell 16 percent; the technology-heavy
‘NASDAQ fell 36 percent. The U.S. government intervened, and new
legislation required CEOs to personally attest to the accuracy of their
firms’ accounts and report results more quickly.® Simultancously,
corporate America increased the level of self-regulation,

Good corporate governance is important to professional in-
vestors, Major institutions rank corporate governance on par with
the firm's financial indicators when evaluating investment dei
sions, A McKinsey study found that professional investors are even
prepared to pay large premiums for investments in firms with high
governance standards.* Premiums ranged from an average of 13
percent in North America and Western Furope to 20 or 25 percent
in Asia and Latin America and even higher in Eastern Europe and
Africa.” On average, when moving from poorest to best on corpo-
rate governance, firms could expect an increase of 10 to 12 percent
in market value.

A number of bodies have published guidelines for good corpo-
rate governance.* One we found very useful was the Organization
for Economic Cooperation and Development's 1999 publication
“OECD Principles for Corporate Governance,” which defined cor-
porate governance as providing the structure for determining orga-
nizational objectives and monitoring performance to ensure that

eee eee

IT Governance Simultaneously Empowers and Controls

objectives are attained.” The OECD emphasized that “there is no
single model of good corporate governance,” but it noted that in
many countries corporate governance is vested in a supervisory
board that is responsible for protecting the rights of shareholders,
-and_other stakeholders (employees, customers, creditors, and_so
on). The board, in turn, works with a senior management team to
implement governance principles that ensure the effectiveness of
organizational processes.

We propose a framework for linking corporate and I gover-
nance. The top of the framework (figure 1-1) depicts the board's re-
lationships, The senior executive team, as the board's agent, articue
lates strategies and desirable behaviors to fulfill board mandates.

Flaune 1-1

Corporate and Key Asset Governance

Corporate governanco ——]

<< onions >

wove] [Semen] | sere

ot snatrociets | | "Saat

'T governance mechanisms
[ponte bet)

‘BZOnS Ni Sion Shel Care forlorn Syst Resa (OR) Used wth oars,

--- PAGE 13 ---
6 IT GOVERNANCE

We see strategy as a set of choices." Who are the targeted cus-
tomers? What are the products and service offerings? What is the
unique and valuable position targeted by the firm? What core pro-
cesses embody the firm’s unique market position?

Desirable behaviors embody the beliefs and culture of the or-
ganization as defined and enacted through not only strategy but
also corporate value statements, mission statements, business prin-
ciples, rituals, and structures."' Desirable behaviors are different in
every enterprise. Behaviors, not strategies, create value. For exam-
ple, Johnson & Johnson relied on autonomous business units to
create shareholder value for nearly a hundred years. Eventually,
however, customers insisted that they wanted to deal with J&J—
not a set of individual J&) operating companies. Accordingly, J8J’s
well-known corporate credo has evolved to specify desirable behav-
iors such as lowering the cost of its products to customers, creating
mechanisms for better understanding the unique needs of individ-
ual customers, and transferring employees across J&J companies to
enhance individual careers and help them identify with the corpo-
ration,! Clear desirable behaviors are key to effective governance
and are major topics in chapters 3 and 6.

‘The lower half of figure 1-1 identifies the six key assets through
which enterprises accomplish their strategies and generate business
value, Senior executive teams create mechanisms to govern the
management and use of each of these assets both independently
and together, The key elements of each asset include the following

+ Humas assets: People, skills, career paths, training, report-
ing, mentoring, competencies, and so on

* Financial assets: Cash, investments, liabilities, cash flow,
receivables, and so on

+ Physical assets: Buildings, plant, equipment, maintenance,
security, utilization, and so on.

* assets: Intellectual property (IP), including product,
services, and process know-how formally patented, copy-
righted, or embedded in the enterprises’ people and systems

+ Information and IT assets: Digitized data, information, and
knowledge about customers, processes performance,
finances, information systems, and so on

|
|

1 Governance Simultaneously Emposveis and Controls 7

+ Relationship assets: Relationships within the enterprise as
well as relationships, brand, and reputation with customers,
suppliers, business units, regulators, competitors, channel
partners, and so on

Governance of the key assets occurs via a large number of or-
ganizational mechanisms (for example, structures, processes, com-
mittee, procedures, and audits). Some mechanisms are unique to
a particular asset (for example, the IT architecture committee)
and others cross and integrate multiple asset types (the capital
approval process, for example) efisuring synergies between key
assets. Maturity across the governance of the six key assets varies
significantly in most enterprises today with financial and physical
assets typically the best governed and information assets among
the worst

At the bottom of figure 1-1 are the mechanisms used to govern
cach of the six key assets. We contend that enterprises with com-
mon mechanisms across multiple assets perform better. For exam=
ple, if the same executive committee governs both financial and IT
assets, a firm can achieve better integration and create more value.
Some mechanisms will always be unique to each asset—the audit
committee for financial assets and the IT architecture committee
for IT, for example—but some common mechanisms lead to better
coordination of the six assets.

Asa sobering exercise, quickly jot down the list of mechanisms
used in your enterprise to govern each of the six assets, Could you
complete the lists? How many of the mechanisms were common
across more than one asset—more than two assets? Coordinating,
the six key assets of an enterprise is not easy. ‘The average assess
ment of a group of forty-two ClOs on how well their enterprises
integrated IT governance with the governance of the other key
assets was less than three on a five-point scale.” Creating common
governance mechanisms across the assets will not only increase
integration but the resulting smaller number of mechanisms will be
simpler to communicate and implement. Education of the senior
‘management team about how governance mechanisms combine to
work for the enterprise is an essential and ongoing task for effective
governance. We contend that many tangible benefits await better
IT governance.

--- PAGE 14 ---
8 IT GOVERNANCE

What Is IT Governance?

In governing If, we can learn from good financial and corporate
governance. For example, the CFO doesn't sign every check or
authorize every payment. Instead, he or she sets up financial gover-
nance specifying who can make the decisions and how. The CFO
then oversees the enterprise’s portfolio of investments and man-
ages the required cash flow and risk exposure, The CFO tracks a
series of financial metrics to manage the enterprise's financial
assets, intervening only if there are problems or unforeseen oppor-
tunities, Similar principles apply to who can commit the enterprise
toa contract o a partnership. Exactly the same approach should be
applied to IT governance.

IT governance: Specifying the decision rights
and accountability framework to encourage
desirable behavior in the use of IT

‘This definition of IT governance aims to capture the simplicity
of IT governance—decision rights and accountability—and its com-
plexity—desirable behaviors that are different in every enterprise."*
Governance determines who makes the decisions. Management is
the process of making and implementing the decisions. For exam-
ple, governance determines who holds the decision rights for how
much the enterprise invests in IT. Management determines the
actual amount of money invested in a given year and the areas in
which the money is invested. ‘The senior management team designs
IY decision rights and accountabilities to encourage the enterprise's
desirable behaviors. If desirable behavior involves independent and
entrepreneurial business units, IT investment decisions will be pri-
marily with the business unit heads. In contrast, if desirable behav-
{or involves an enterprisewide view of the customer with a single
point of customer contact, a more centralized IT investment gover-
nance model works better. More centralized models for HR (and the
other key assets) would also assist in achieving a single point of cus-
tomer contact. Problems occur when there is a mismatch between

|
|

TT Governance Simultaneously Empowers and Conteols 9

desirable behavior and governance. In one financial services firm, a
key desirable behavior was rapid innovation by business units to
meet the enterprisewide objective of an increased percentage of
sales from products introduced in the last five years, In contrast to
the stated desirable behavior, most of the If governance mecha-
nisms conspired to discourage innovation, A particular business
unit wanted to lead its financial services industry segment with a
new [F-enabled service providing alerts to important clients via their
handheld devices like pagers and cell phones. To implement this
service, the business unit had to pay the entire cost of the wireless
infrastructure (the technical foundation for the product) plus the
application development cost for the business process that would
use the wireless infrastructure for alerts. This up-front payment was
required even though other business units and product offerings
would probably utilize the same wireless infrastructure. ‘Thus the
innovator was asked to bear all the risk and other business units
could then utilize the infrastructure if successful, This practice is like
asking the first car using the road to pay all the construction costs.

This firm's solution was to introduce a dividend system consis-
tent with the firm's culture. If the enterprise's senior management
saw a potential multibusiness unit application for the infrastructure,
the CEO would fund some of the cost (typically 20 percent) from
corporate funds. Then the innovating business unit would make
the remaining infrastructure investment. If other business units
later utilized the infrastructure, the innovating business unit re-
ceived a dividend of one-third its cost from each business unit using
the infrastructure. This approach encouraged early adopters and
created infrastructure to foster future innovation across the enter-
prise. The new funding mechanism, implemented via the executive
management, capital investment, and IT architecture committees,
carefully balanced risk and reward, encouraging rather than dis-
couraging desirable behavior.

This example highlights two complementary sides of gover-
nance articulated by the OECD:"§

+ Behavioral side of corporate governance: “Corporate gover
nance encompasses the relationships and ensuing patterns
of behavior between different agents in a limited liability
corporation; the way managers and shareholders but also

--- PAGE 15 ---
10 IT GOVERNANCE

employees, creditors, key customers, and communities inter-
act with each other to form the strategy of the company.”

+ Normative side of corporate governance: “Corporate gover-
nance also refers to the set of rules that frame these relation-
ships and private behaviors, thus shaping corporate strategy
formation, These can be the company law, securities regula-
tion, listing requizements. But they may also be private,
self-regulation.”

The behavioral side of IT governance defines the formal and
informal relationships and assigns decision rights to specific indi-
viduals or groups of individuals, The normative side defines mecha-
nisms formalizing the relationships and providing rules and op-
crating procedures to ensure that objectives are met. We found that
enterprises often implement a dozen or more mechanisms to make

IP decisions.
Effective IT governance must address three questions:

1, What decisions must be made to ensure effective manage-
ment and use of IT?

2. Who should make these decisions?
How will these decisions be made and monitored?

The goal of this book is to provide frameworks and insights
from top-performing enterprises to help management teams ad-
dress these questions.

Important IT Governance Concepts

Figure 1-2 provides a grid that addresses the first two IT governance
questions: What decisions must be made and who should make
them? We will refer to this grid as the Governance Arrangements
Matrix. The column heading of the Governance Arrangements Ma-
trix lists five interrelated IT decisions:

+ IP principles —Claritying the business role of IT

+ [-architecture—Defining integration and standardization
requirements
+ IT infiastructure—Determining shared and enabling services

TY Governance Simultaneously Enipowers and

Controls u

* Business application needs—Specitying the business need for
purchased or internally developed IT applications

* IT investment and priovitization—Choosing which initiatives
to fund and how much to spend

‘These five Key decisions are all related and require linking for
ctlective governance—typically flowing {rom left to right on the
matrix. For example, IT principles drive the architecture that leads
to infrastructure. ‘The infrastructure capability enables applications
‘to be built based on business needs specified aften by the business
Process owners, Finally IT investments (shorthand for IT invest.
ment and prioritization process) must be driven by the IT princi
bles, architecture, infrastructure, and application needs. However,
each of these decisions has at its core a unique set of issues, which
wwe will describe in chapter 2. One or more people are responsible
for making each of these decisions. Typically, many more people
Provide Input to these decisions. IT governance involves defining

Figure 1-2

Governance Arrangements Matrix—Which Governance Archetypes
Are Used for Different Types of Decisions?

fe gs
on _

jew | |
Pe
wy |—— 7.

ce a i

1 20087 Sion Stool Cele rinoenaton 8

Resor (SF, Usd wth geen,

--- PAGE 16 ---
‘who will be responsible for both input and decision making for
each decision.

The row headings in figure 1-2 list a set of archetypes for speci-
lying decision rights. We deliberately chose provocative political
archetypes because, although exaggerated, most managers identify
with these stereotypes." Each archetype identifies the type of peo-
ple involved in making an If decision:

+ Business monarchy—Top managers
+ IT monarchy—I? specialists
+ Feudal—Bach business unit making independent decisions

+ Federa!—Combination of the corporate center and the busi-
ness units with or without IT people involved

* FF duopoly—IT group and one other group (for example, top
management or business unit leaders)

+ Anarchy—tsolated individual or small group decision making

Together these archetypes describe all the decision arrange-
ments we found. Most enterprises use a variety of decision arche-
types across the five decisions, The question mark in figure 1-2 rep-
resents the challenge for every enterprise to determine where it
wants to locate both input and decision-making responsibility for
cach type of governance decision. Throughout this book, we will
describe how top-performing companies have allocated their gov-
erance responsibilities. In chapter $ we will report findings from
our research on the relationships between various governance ar-
rangements and governance and financial performance.

‘While the Governance Arrangements Matrix maps out the types
of decisions and the archetypes for making the decisions, the third
question—how these decisions will be made and monitored—re-
quires design and implementation of governance mechanisms,
such as committees, roles, and formal processes. In chapter 4 we
look at common mechanisms (business/IT relationship managers,
IT councils, service-level agreements, chargeback arrangements, or-
ganizational structures, and so on) and discuss their effectiveness

Given that enterprises are making five types of IT decisions at
multiple organizational levels using a variety of mechanisms, it is
easy to see how individual actions might work in opposition to

A) sowemance simultaneously Empowers and Controls: 13

each other rather than in harmony. The complexity and difficulty of
explaining IT governance is one of the most serious barriers to im-
provement, We found empitically that the best predictor of IT gov.
emance performance is the percentage of managers in leadership
positions who can accurately describe IT governance.” Contribut-
ing to governance woes is the fact the majority of senior executives
aren’t familiar with their governance, On average, CIOs in our studly
estimated that only 38 percent of managers in leadership positions
in their enterprises could accurately describe theie IT governance—so
how could they follow it? In above average governance-performing
enterprises, 45 percent or more of managers could accurately de-
scribe their IT governance. In only a few very top performers were
80 percent of senior executives familiar with their IT governance.
‘What is the percentage in your enterprise? Why?

To help understand, cesign, communicate, and sustain effe
tive governance, we propose an IT Governance Design Framework
in figure 1-3. We present it here in skeletal form so that readers can

FIGURE 1-9

IT Governance Design Framework

Enterprise Relationship governance | Business
Peovcnarce rh —

( inancial gavemance | |

governance:
‘wtangemonts |
i
| W governance
mechanism
‘\,

[resco
x /

2 2000 VT Sten Sehcl Cantar nerain Syst Pasa OI sso With erin,

--- PAGE 17 ---
u IT GOVERNANCE

complete it for any enterprise, ‘The framework maps the hasmo-
nization (the horizontal arrows) of enterprise strategy and organi:
ation, IT governance arrangements, and business performance
goals. The enterprise strategy, governance arrangemen's and per-
formance goals are enacted through FT organization and. desirable
pehaviors, governance mechanisms, and metrics, respectively. The
framework also illustrates the need to harmonize IT governance
with the governance of other Key assets, We will return to this
Tramework in chapter 6 to study how enterprises can assign and
assess IT governance.

Why Is [T Governance Important?

Effective IV’ governance requires a significant amount of manage
ment time and attention, Is it worth it? Growing enterprise de-
pendence on information and IT suggests that Its Good IT gover
rence harmonizes decisions about the management and use of IT
vith desired behaviors and business objectives. Without carefully
designed and Implemented governance structures, enterprisis leave
this harmony to chance, There are many reasons why IT decision
making should not be left to chance and thus needs good gover
nance, Bight of the reasons follow.

Good If Governance Pays Off

Among the forprofit firms we studied, the ones pursuing @ specific
strategy (for example, customer intimacy oF operational excellence)
vith above-average IT governance performance had superior profits
measured by a three-year industry-adjusted return on assets (ROA)
“The differences varied by strategy of the firm, but the above-aversBe
governance-performing firms had ROAs more than 0 percent higher
{han the firms with poorer governance pursuing the same strategy:
Governance was, of course not the only factor, but good governance
ten comes with effective management practices in all areas.'*

IT Is Expensive

‘The average enterprise's IY investment is now greater than 42 per
cent of anaual revenues and still rising. This investment results in

If Governance Simultaneously Empowers and Controls 15

IT exceeding 50 percent of the annual total capital investment of
many enterprises. As TT has become more important and pervasive,
senior management teams are increasingly challenged to manage
and control IT to ensure that value is created. To address this issue,
many enterprises are creating or refining IT governance structures
to better focus IT spending on strategic priorities

IT Is Pervasive

In many enterprises, centrally managed IT is no longer possible or
desirable, There was a time when requests for IT spending came
only from the IT group. Now IT’ spending originates all over the
enterprise. Some estimates suggest that only 20 percent of IT'spend-
ing is visible in the IT budget.” The rest of the spending occurs int
business process budgets, product development budgets, and every
other type of budget. In several firms we examined, we even found
substantial IT spending hidden in the furniture budgets! Gone too
are the days when the IT group was the only place where techni-
cally savvy people worked. There isn’t a foreign exchange desk
manager today who wouldn't get personally involved in making.
decisions about the technology platform for foreign exchange oper
ations, After all, when 100 percent of your cash flow is on Tine there
is a lot at stake. Personally understanding the technology platform
just makes sense. Well-esigned IT governance arrangements dis-
tribute [T decision making to those responsible for outcomes.

New Information Technologies Bombard Enterprises
with New Business Opportunities

‘The rapid introduction of new technologies, including Web-based
services, mobile technologies, and enterprise systems, creates stra-
tegic threats and opportunities.» Witness the rise of mass cus:
tomization and one-to-one marketing resulting from technologies
capable of capturing customer information in a cost-effective and
real-time fashion. The fact that information is so readily available,
however, means that information assets decay nearly as rapidly as
they accumulate, For example, aggregators like Yodalec—which
aggregate an individual's financial information from multiple
sites—posed a threat to financial services firms such as Citibank

--- PAGE 18 ---
16 IT GOVERNANCE

and Vanguard by attempting to intermediate theit customer rela-
tionships. Financial services firms responded within six months by
absorbing aggregator functionality into their own offerings, Many
firms now hold information about their customers’ entire financial
holdings on their sites.

lo respond so rapidly to the threat of aggregators, Citibank, Van-
guard. and other firms needed i flexible IT infrastructure, tnfrastruc-
lure must balance the dual needs of cost effectiveness in meeting
current business requirements and the flexibility to support future
business needs. Foresight in establishing the right infrastructure at
the right time enables rapid implementation of new electronically
based business initiatives as well as consolidation andl cost reduction
of current business processes. Inability to respond to technology-
Induced market changes can threaten a firm's survival, as retailers
such ay Barnes & Noble and ‘Toys “R” Us learned in the late 1990s,
Foresight is more likely if an enterprise has formalized governance
processes for harmonizing desirable behaviors and tt’ ptineiples.

IE Governance ls Critical to Organizational
Learning About IT Value

As a visiting CEO once remarked to our M.B.A. class, “IP invest=
ment is like advertising, I know half of it is well spent, just don’t
know which half.”

Enterprises have steuggled to understand the value of their IT
related initiatives because value cannot always be readily demon-
strated through @ taditional discounted cast flow analysis, Value
results not only from incremental process improvements but also
from the ability to respond to competitive pressures, As the aggre-
gator example demonstrates, it can be difficult to determine in
advance how much a new capability or aclditional information is
worth, Customers of Citibank and Vanguard value the convenience
of having all their financial information in one place, Would they
be willing to pay separately for this service? Not clear, But aggrega-
tion has become a prerequisite to doing business as a full-service
financial services company. Citibank and Vanguard can more likely,
attach a value to the information after it has become available and
they lear more about their customers and how they can ethically
use this information. Effective governance creates mechanisms

1 Govemance Simuttateously Empowers and Conteols v

through which enterprises can debate potential value and formal-

ive their learning
Governance also facilitates leaming by formalizing exception
processes, Enterprises often learn through exceptions—where a dif.
ferent approach from standard practice is used for good reasons. Li
fective governance makes learning via exceptions explicit and shares
any new practices across the enterprise if appropriate. Enterprises in
our study reported that 50 percent of new systems involved excep-
ions to their enterprises’ normal policies for architecture or invest-
ment, Just over half of the exceptions occurred through the format
exception process, allowing enterprises to learn and update their
policies, However, the rest of the exceptions occurred when rene-
gades made decisions independently to meet local needs, effectively
preventing systematic enterprise learning, ‘These renegade decisions
result from poorly designed, poorly communicated governance
rangements that are not aligned with management incentives.

IT Value Depends on More Than Good Technology

In recent years there have been spectacular failures of large 11° in
vestments—major enterprise resource planning (ERP) systems
Uatives that were never completed, e-business initiatives that were
ill-conceived or poorly executed, and data-mining experiments
that generated plenty of data but few valuable leads, Some esti-
mates place IT failure rates at over 70 percent of all IT projects.”*
Although some failures result from technical glitches, most repre-
sent the inability of organizations to adopt new processes that
apply new technologies effectively.

AsIT implementations enable increasing standardization and in=
ogration of business processes, the roles of technologists and busi-
ness leaders become increasingly intertwined, [decision making
necessarily becomes joint decision making. When senior managers
abdicate to I executives responsibility for IT success, disaster often
ensues. Successful firms not only make better IT decisions, they
also have better IT decision-making processes. Specifically, success-
{ul firms involve the right people in the process. Having the right
people involved in IT decision making yields both more strategic
applications and greater buy-in, These more involved people then
produce better implementations.

--- PAGE 19 ---
18 If GOVERNANCE

Senior Management Has Limited Bandwidth

Senior management does not have the bandwidth to consider all
the requests for IT investments that occur in a large enterprise let
alone to get involved in the many other IT-related decisions. If sen-
ior managers attempt to make too many decisions, they become a
bottleneck, But decisions throughout the enterprise should be con-
sistent with the direction in which senior management is taking
the organization, Carefully designed IT governance provides a
clear, transparent I’ decision-making process that leads to consis
tent behavior linked back to the senior management vision while
empowering everyone's creativity.

Leading Enterprises Govern IU Differently

Top-perlorming firms, In our study, did not follow the most com-
mon governance patterns, Instead, leading performers on a pare
ticular financial metric had specific governance patterns that en-
couraged thelr unique combination of desitable behaviors, For
example, firms leading on revenue growth had more decentralized
governance arangements designed to promote customer respon-
siveness and fast innovation. In contrast, firms leading on profit
had much more centralized governance arrangements designed to
promote sharing and reuse and asset utilization, Top performing
firms balancing multiple performance goals had governance mod-
els that blended centralized and decentialized decision making,
All top performers’ governance had one aspect in common, Their
governance made transparent the tensions around IT decisions
such as standardization versus innovation. We will explore the gov-
ernance design implications of these patterns in more detail in
chapter 5.

How Effective IT Governance Impacts IT Value:
A Case Study of UPS

United Parcel Service (UPS) illustrates how an enterprise can trans-
form TT from a strategic liability to a strategic advantage through
effective I governance. When Oz Nelson became CLO of UPS in
1986, he was concerned about the firm's competitiveness given its

FT Governance Simultaneously Empowers and Contiots 19

cxisting technology competence, His CIO described the concer
as follows: “The strength of Federal Express's tracking system and
the things they were doing with technology were eroding what lit-
tle share of the market UPS had in air services, The UPS board was
immensely concerned that Federal Express would not only take the
air business away but also start doing daily ground business. ‘The
board also saw the profitability of the air business and said, “We
just can’t continue as we are. We [must] put a lot of money into
technology.”25

Under Nelson's leadership, senior management invested $11
billion over ten years to build a state-of-the-art data center, hire
technical experts, create a global network, develop sharable data-
bases, implement enterprisewide applications, and consteuct a 1e-
dundant operations environment to protect against disaster, But
UPS invested more than money: it invested management time and
altention to target spending at key business objectives and to gens
erate benefits from the investments, While creating its new systems
cnvironment, UPS designed anid implemented I governance pro-
cesses that ensured effective IT-related decistons,

UPS's IT governance had its roots in a senior management IT
Steering Committee, which established the role of 11 at UPS and ap-
proved key investment decisions, ‘Phe IT Steering Committee man-
dated the firm's highly centralized and standardized I envionment
to ensure reliability, cost effectiveness, consistent customer setvice,
and easy access for customers to their package data, These principles
have consistently guided other key IT decisions at UPS. For example,
UPS's I Governance Committee (a team of top IT leaders) enforces
Steering Committee mandates related to the design, implementa-
lon, and management of the IT architecture. The ClO—a member
of the IT Steering Committee—heads the Governance Committee.
The Governance Committee is responsible for enforcing architec.
tural standards, but members of the committee also work to ensure
that UPS's commitment to standards does not unintentionally re-
strict the firm’s flexibility, This flexibility has become increasingly
important as the firm has diversified into businesses like supply
chain financing and service parts logistics, which have different
technology needs from the package delivery business,

But the Governance Committee represents only one step in
the debates about technology standards. The top IT architect—who

--- PAGE 20 ---
20 IT GOVERNANCE

reports to the CIO and is also a member of the Governance Com
mittee—heads a Standards Committee of key technologists who
determine when specific standards have become obsolete or cannot
meet the requirements of a specific application. This committee
handles most of the daily negotiations on standards, but it refers
decisions to the Governance Committee when members believe
that a standards decision has implications beyond the application
in question, Similarly, in cases where the Governance Committee
believes that a standards decision will have long-term strategic im-
plications for the firm, the CIO can refer the decision to the IT
Steering Committee. The objective is to gain the benefits of stan-
dardization without stifling business opportunities.

While I1-only committees shepherd architecture and standards
decisions, business leaders take responsibility for identifying IT
priorities. UPS's executive team has defined the firm's four cross-
functional core processes: customer relationship management, cus-
tomer information management, package management, and prod-
uct management. A senior executive heads each core process and
has full-time staff responsible for designing subprocesses and iden-
tifying IT requirements. Anyone in the firm can submit a project
charter to a process team. The project charter spells out the ex:
pected costs and benefits of a potential project. The process teams
review the charters and refer their highest priority projects to the
Steering Committee.

"These multiple IT governance mechanisms continuously align
M-telated behaviors with corporate strategy at UPS. In the mid-
1990s existing governance mechanisms helped key managers rec-
ognize the importance of the Internet to UPS's business. Conse-
quently, UPS benefited quickly from its e-business initiatives. The
firm continues to aggressively pursue e-business opportunities, cut-
ting operating costs and enhancing customer services. TY gover-
nance first helped the firm survive a competitive threat. Now, UPS's
governance mechanisms position IT as a strategic weapon.

How IT Governance Simultaneously
Empowers and Controls

‘As the UPS case illustrates, making IT a competitive asset requires
senior management leadership. UPS's IT governance structures cre-

IY Governance Simultancously Empowers and Controls a

ate strategic control at the top of the firm while empowering deci-
sion making at multiple organizational levels. Senior management
makes IT governance transparent so that everyone understands and
follows the process for proposing, implementing, and using IT.
Consequently, UPS can consistently generate desirable behaviors
regarding the management and use of IT in the firm, and it shows
in the firm’s bottom-line performance.

In Figure 1-4, we show UPS's governance arrangements in a
simple version of the Governance Arrangements Matrix. UPS has
thoughtfully designed IT governance to be transparent to all execu-
tives through its four coordinated governance mechanisms: (a) the
IT Steering Committee, which vests strategic decisions in four top
executives, (b) the IT Governance Committee, which places archi-
tecture decisions in the hands of top IT executives, (¢) the formal
“charter” process, which winnows down the entire enterprise's IT
project proposals to those best aligned with strategic objectives,
and (@) the referral process for handling exceptions to standards at
the appropriate organizational level. Knowing what decisions are
made by others and what decisions are under their own responsi-
bility enables managers to make decisions that result in desirable
behavior as defined at UPS,

Figune 1-4

IT Governance at UPS

Dectiow
| T T iT 7 |
5 | naire | A t

rinpes _Arcntecure "Seats | hed” | tnvniment

| wet Toessie) newt [Oesson) teat [Orin] wre [Beeson iow [Dveinen

ra | - im
itt |

5 oe bet] |

$ | T t 1

--- PAGE 21 ---
2 IT GOVERNANCE

Governance: Call to Action

Information has always been important in business enterprises, but
with recent technological developments, the role and value of
information has changed significantly in recent years. Information

« is increasingly easy to collect and digitize
+ has increasing importance in products and services

+ is very hard to value or price

has a decreasing half-life

+ has increasing tisk exposure (e.g., security and privacy)

« isa significant expense in most enterprises

These factors together make information and IT the least un-
derstood and most poorly utilized key asset in many enterprises.

This book provides an overview and framework for IT gover-
nance, a critical management issue for enterprises concerned with
the value they receive from IT. The concept of IT governance has
existed for almost as long as computers have been in businesses,
but widespread interest and concern Is fairly new—resulting from
recent business trends such as e-business, globalization, Y2K, busi-
ness process reengineering, business continuance, and transparency
in corporate reporting. In the worst case, probably true in almost all
enterprises somewhere, these trends resulted in knee-jerk and un-
sound IT decision making with no accountability. Little field-based
research on TT governance and few publications help managers un-
derstand the issues involved in designing effective governance
structures and processes,

Recall the study that found enterprises with superior corporate
governance to be more highly valued in the market. We found a
similar pattern of higher financial performance for enterprises with
better IT governance. Thus, we believe a performance premium
awaits senior managers who can implement IT governance appro-
priate to their particular combination of strategy, desirable behav-
jor, and corporate governance. The senior managers that accept
that responsibility first will gain the premium—the followers will
just play catch-up. This book should help senior managers achieve
that premium. We unleashed the “killer app” in the 1990s. Now we
must govern the apps that are killing us.

IF Governance Simultaneously Empowers and Controls 23

Goals and Overview of the Book

This book proposes an approach to systematically planning IT
input and decision rights in key IT decisions. The model relies on
two tools: the Governance Arrangements Matrix (figure 1-2) and
the Governance Design Framework (figure 1-3). These two tools
apply our political governance archetypes (monarchy, feudal, fed-
eral, duopoly, and anarchy) for each decision and identify: coher-
ent set of formal governance mechanisms for implementation (for
example, committees, approval processes, relationships, and orga-
nizational structures). We illustrate the approach with examples
from a number of leading enterprises (State Street Corporation,
Delta Air Lines, DBS Bank in Singapore, DuPont, UNICEF, and the
Metropolitan Police Service-Scotland Yard in the United Kingdom)
and explore how their governance patterns evolved to become a
strategic tool.

This book is designed for all executives in all types of ent
prises struggling to generate additional value from IT, Executive
readers will finish the book with specific ideas for management
changes that will make a difference in the performance of their
enterprise. IT managers will finish the book with a framework, best
practices, and clear examples of how to work with their business
colleagues to improve their IT governance,

Chapters 2, 3, and 4 review the three questions governance
must address: (a) what decisions to make, (b) who should make the
decisions, and (c) how to make and monitor the decisions. Chapter
2 explores the five key IT’ decisions, After delineating the manage-
ment issues associated with each decision, this chapter raises the
question of who should be making each decision in your enter-
prise. A case on Delta Air Lines demonstrates the interrelationships
of the five IT decisions.

Chapter 3 discusses who should make IT decisions. This chapter
explores common governance patterns using the Governance Ar-
rangements Matrix. The discussion describes how common IT’ gov.
emance patterns limit the value generated from [1, The chapter
reveals how governance differs across the five decision domains.
Case studies of DuPont, DBS Bank, and Motorola describe the ap-
proaches of three leading firms to aligning governance with busi
ness objectives.

--- PAGE 22 ---
24 IT GOVERNANCE

Chapter 4 discusses how decisions are made and monitored
by focusing on the formal mechanisms enterprises deploy to im-
plement governance. The chapter reviews the benelits and risks of
the most popular mechanisms. Examples of governance mecha-
nisms used by Carlson Companies and other leading enterprises
describe how well-implemented mechanisms can encourage desit-
able behavior.

Chapters 5 and 6 discuss the relationship between IT gover:
nance and business strategy and how IT governance influences
enterprise outcomes, Chapter $ shows how top-performing ente
prises govern differently from the typical enterprise and from each
other, We contrast the governance arrangements of exceptional
enterprises in the areas of: governance performance, profitability,
revenue growth, and enterprisewide asset utilization, using the
Governance Arrangements Matix.

Chapter 6 discusses how enterprises can use the Governance
Design Framework to design and assess governance. This chapter
identifies the range of strategic objectives enterprises pursue, such
as specific value disciplines, and describes how enterprises harmo
nize individual IT decisions and how governance changes to reflect
strategic business changes, The chapter also discusses how gover-
nance addresses dueling requirements for business unit autonomy
and synergy. ‘The State Street Corporation case study provides an
‘example of how new strategic objectives lead to a new governance
approach.

Chapter 7 focuses on the unique environments of not-for
profit and government enterprises. Although research findings
reported In this book generally apply to both for-profit and not.
for-profit enterprises, the not-for-profit sector has unique objectives
that necessarily affect governance, We explore those issues through
case studies of the Metropolitan Police Service-Scotland Yard and
UNICEI

Chapter 8 wraps up the key points of the book with a list of
symptoms of poor governance that would warrant urgent action,
‘We follow with a list of ten management principles for effective IT
governance, We also discuss how incentives and reward systems
affect IT governance design and performance.

Five Key IT Decisions:
Making IT a Strategic Asset

The significant problems we face cannot be solved
by the same level of thinking that created them,

“Albert Einstein

THE DIFFERENCE between management and governance ts like
the difference between a soccer team running harder and practicing
longer and the team stepping back to analyze its composition and
game strategy. An analysis may reveal that the team needs to adel
coaches or allocate different decision-making responsibilities among
the team leaders, Similarly, extracting greater value from IT is rarely
@ matter of just working harder or longer, Achieving more value
may requize involving different people in IT decisions, designing
new ways of making [Trelated decisions, or developing new tech-
niques for implementing IT decisions. Managers make hundreds of
decisions per week—some after careful analysis and others as part
of the daily frenctic activity. Governance design and analysis re-
quires stepping back from day-to-day decision making, taking Ein-
stein’s advice and focusing on identifying the fundamental deci-
sions to be made andl who is best positioned to make them,

As noted in chapter 1, effective governance addresses three
questions:

--- PAGE 23 ---
26 IT GOVERNANCE

‘+ What decisions must be made?
+ Who should make these decisions?
* How will we make and monitor these decisions?

This chapter focuses on the first question: What decisions?
Alter reviewing the five decisions that must be made, we discuss the
governance issues that enterprises face—not to describe how to
make each decision but to identify the dimensions of these deci-
sions and the key issues to consider when designing IT gover-
hance.1 As you read this chapter, ask yourself, Who is making each
of these decisions in my enterprise, and how qualified are they to
do so? Also ask, How are we measuring ancl monitoring decision-
making performance and business valuc?

What Decisions Must Be Made?

Every enterprise must address five interrelated I decisions: IT prins
ciples, I’ architecture, IT Infrastructure, business application needs,
and IT investment and prioritization. Figure 2-1 arranges these de-
cisions to emphasize their critical interconnections, Principles deci-
sions sit atop the framework because decisions on IT principles—by
clarifying enterprise objectives for IT—establish the dixection for all
other decisions. If principles are not clear, it is unlikely that the
other decisions will coalesce meaningfully. IT architecture decisions.
translate IT principles into requirements for integration and stan-
davdization and then delineate a technical road map for providing
needed capabilities. I’ investment and prioritization decisions mar-
shal resources to convert principles into systems

Decisions on infrastructure and applications can flow "top
down" from the principles, the architecture, and the investment
criteria, In that case, the infrastructure creates needed I capabili-
ties, and applications leverage the capabilities. Just as often, busi-
ness needs and opportunities identify the need for IT applications,
which “bubble up” to create new infrastructure requirements. Ulti-
mately, investment decisions select and fund infrastructure and
application initiatives, which implement an architecture designed
to embody IT principles—and ultimately business principles.

five Key IY Decisions: Making IT a Strategic Asset 27

FIGURE 2-1

Key IT Governance Decisions

ane ne

‘chnical standardization needs

and integration Specifying he businass nee
| forpuehaved or interna

_| seven apteatons

£2008 MIT Sloan Senoo Cantor intonation Systems Recah (ISR), Use wth pomision

Decision 1: IT Principles

Enterprises with clarity and focus generally produce better results
in any endeavor, Gaining above-industry-average business value
from IT is no exception. Study after study demonstrates that enter-
prises achieving superior business value from IT have a sinall num:
ber of clearly articulated IT principles. IT principles are a related set
of high-level statements about how IT is used in the business, Once
articulated, IT principles become part of the enterprise’s man-
agement lexicon and can be discussed, debated, supported, over
tumed, and evolved, MeadWestvaco, a large manufacturing firm
that produces paper, packaging, consumer and office products, and
specialty chemicals, provides an example of how a firm derived its
11 principles by articulating its expectations for IT to support busi-
ness strategy.s

To compete effectively in its target markets, MeadWestvaco
implemented an enterprise resource planning (ERP) system to cre-
ate efficiencies and a seamless supply chain. Following the ERP
implementation, MeadWestvaco management wanted to preserve
the efficiencies of the firmn’s more standardized business processes

--- PAGE 24 ---
28 IT GOVERNANCE

but at the same time support valuable diversity among business
units, Toward these objectives, management listed a number of

business principles:

1, Leverage economies of scale
2, Standardize processes and technologies wherever
appropriate

3. Common tools and business diversity (one ERP system)
st control and operational efficiency
5, Alignment and responsiveness to negotiated business

requirements

‘These business principles led to the following set of IT princi-
ples (Which MeadWestvaco refers to as its IT governance goals):
1, Benchmarked lowest total cost of ownership

. Architectural integrity

Rapid deployment of new applications
Measured, improving, and communicated value and
responsiveness

2.
3. Consistent, flexible infrastructure
4.
5

‘The hallmark of an effective set of IT principles is a clear trail
of evidence from the business to the IT management principles. For
MeadWestvaco, architectural integrity (IT principle 2) provides
for both standardized processes and technologies (business princ
ple 2) and cost control and operational efficiency (business prin-
ciple 4); rapid deployment of new applications (CT principle 4)
promotes alignment and responsiveness to negotiated business re-
quirements (business principle 5); a consistent, flexible infrastruc-
ture (IT principle 3) should enable all five business principles. Com-
bined, MeadWestvaco’s business and IT principles provide clear
direction for using IT to enable business strategy.

IT principles can also be used as a tool for educating executives
about technology strategy and investment decisions. MetLife cre-
ated a set of seven ITT principles to “establish a shared understand-
ing of strategic IT direction and to guide tactical decisions."* Met-
Life's IT principles communicate MetLife's IT values and goals. The

Hive Key IT Decisions: Making ITa Strategic Asset 29

principles establish an enterprise position that “can be translated
into specific policies, standards and guidelines":

iG
2
3,
4.
s,
6.

Enable the business.
Ensure information integrity.
Create a common customer view.
Promote consistent architecture.
Utilize industry standards.

Reuse before buy; buy before build.
Manage IT as an investment.

The chief technology officer at MetLife led a team to develop
these principles to help the growing number of non-IT managers
who needed to make IT-based decisions. The principles reflect the
importance of knowledge-sharing across the enterprise, and they
have led to increased awareness of how business value is achieved
from IT. Each principle is further articulated. For example, for prin-
ciple 7 about investment, “MetLife will manage IT and associated
processes as an investment portfolio, adopting new solutions when
cost effective and retiring existing technology that is no longer cost
effective or risk acceptable.” In the booklet used to articulate these
principles and educate managers, each principle is supported by a
rationale and a set of implications. For example, the implications
for principle 7 include “organizational responsibilities for review-
ing, managing, and maintaining the portfolio must be clearly de-
fined” and “a dynamic change management process . . . includes
the following stages: emerging, adopted/standard, rejected, excep-
tion, retired/sunset, and grandfathered.”

IT principles should define desirable behavior for both IT pro-
fessionals and IT users. For example, at MetLife, systems developers
and their business partners learn from principle 6 that MetLife in-
tends to reuse existing IT capabilities rather than buy new system
components. Developers understand that proposing to purchase a
system with capability similar to an existing system will demand
a strong justification. Business users learn to accept that their tech-
nology choices are limited.

In addition to IT principles clarifying desirable behaviors, MetLife
and MeadWestvaco have specific principles guiding management

--- PAGE 25 ---
30 IT GOVERNANCE

choices, These principles are specific to individual firm strategies:
‘We suggest that detailed TT principles should clarify at least three
expectations for I’ in an enterprise:

|. What is the enterprise's desired operating model?
2, How will IT support the desired operating model?

3. How will IT be funded?

The first two questions specify how an enterprise develops and
delivers products and services and clarify the parameters for future
infrastructure and applications decisions. Answers to these ques-
tions evolve to reflect organizational learning and new business
strategies. The third question determines the brow criteria for TT
investment. Specifically, IT investments can be funded centrally oF
within business units, or some combination of the two approaches
can be applied, The funding model specifies whether enterprise-
wide priorities o business unit priorities take precedence in invest-
ment decisions.

In our experience, few enterprises provide this kind of clatity
through their IT principles. Given that principles provide the direc
tion for all IT decisions, equivocating on principles limits the effi
cacy of the other four decisions

Decision 2: IT Architecture

by clarifying how TP supports business principles, IT principles
state—implicitly or explicitly—the requizements for process stan-
gardization and integration in an enterprise, The IT architecture is
the organizing logic for data, applications, and infrastructure, captured
in.a set of policies, relationships, are technical choices to achieve desired
business and technical standardization and integration, By providing @
road map for infrastructure and applications (and consequently
investment decisions), architecture decisions are pivotal to effective
IT management and use.

Enterprises need an organizing logic for data, applications, and
infrastructure because integeation and standardization shape I~
capabilities, Process integration allows multiple business units to
provide a single face to a customer or to move seamlessly from one

Hive Key IT Decisions: Maki

a Strategie Asset 31

function (for example, sales) to another (for example, service). The
Key to process integration from a technology perspective is data
standardization—providing a single definition and a single set of
characteristics to be captured with a data clement. As standardized,
data are made available, business owners can effectively integrate
their processes. Thus, the architectural requirement is data stan-
dardization—no casy task, Data standardization must be planned,

his capability never happens by accident.

Process standardization is very different from process integra-
lion. The key to process standardization is discipline—adherence to
a single, consistent way of doing things. Process standardization.
provides predictability and efficiency, like the process af cooking
hamburgers at McDonald's, For knowledge work, process standardi-
zation requires that all individuals performing the process use the
same system, Like data standardization, process standardization
never happens by accident—it must be planned and explicitly im-
plemented by explaining and demonstrating the value over and
over again,

Process and data standardization are the defining characteris-
tics of enterprise architecture. Some enterprises need a great deal of,
both process and data standardization. More diversified businesses
may have much less need for standardization across organizational
entities, These more diversified enterprises may nonetheless benefit
from technical standardization, Technical standardization facilitates
common objectives such as cost-effective processing, negotiated
vendor agreements, und enterprisewide secutily. Choices about
technical, data, and process standardization strongly influence IT
architecture design

‘MetLife's IT principles specily the need for a common customer
view—a data standardization requirement. In addition, MetLife
wants to ensure information integrity; use industry standards; and
reuse before buy, buy before build. These principles determined
“MetLife’s requirements for integration and standardization, form-
ing the basis for MetLife’s enterprise architecture. A simplified ver-
sion of the enterprise architecture is shown in figure 2-2

Because a common customer view is the key standardization
requirement listed in MetLife's IT principles, data is at the center of
its enterprise architecture, As an outgrowth of several large mergers,

--- PAGE 26 ---
Forms and

sequrerments

Werke

sence

recording

Everts

‘Application business logic and data ter

‘Application presentation tier

Calcenter <>

Sales ofice 4p

i

MetLife’s Enterprise Architecture

Servos provicer > [

Figure 2-2

Five Key IT Decisions: Making IT a Strategic Asset 33

most of MetLife’s data is locked into If applications, The integra-
Hon hub pictured in the enterprise architecture provides central-
ized access to data embedded in legacy applications. Together the
centralized data and the integration engine provide the common
customer view prescribed by the IT principles. Stakeholders will
gain access to the data—typically the outputs of applications
using @ standardized portal architecture, shown on the left side of
the diagram,

MetLife’s IT architects use this drawing to communicate with
senior managers and business partners the underlying logic for IT
development at MetLife, The enterprise architecture guides new
application development by explaining how IT will deliver on the
firm’s IT principles. For example, MetLife’s enterprise architecture
embodies principles of reuse in its portal architecture—every appli-
cation will apply the same standards for output to stakeholders, In
addition to providing a common customer view, the centralized
data stores and integration engine enhance information integrity
by reducing redundancy. Thus, the enterprise architecture trans-
lates 11° principles into a clear vision of how IT will enable business
objectives.

Enterprise architectures capture the organizing logic in techini-
cal choices and policies, MetLife’s enterprise architecture specifies
only one high-level technical choice (an industry standard)—ACORD.
standards for data formats.’ Most technical choices need not be
conveyed to senior managers. They will be elaborated at lower le
cls of the architecture, MetLife’s enterprise architecture elaborates
an important policy—sign-on, navigation, and related concerns
will be embedded in the portal rather than in applications, ‘This
policy has important implications for how new applications will be
linked to existing applications.

Acctitical policy articulated by a high-level architecture is where
the shared infrastructure stops and applications begin, The MetLife
architecture shows that all applications share the channels, portal,
data stores, and integration engine. The presentation and business
logic applications are thus distinguished from infrastructure. Com-

‘municating where infrastructure stops and applications begin sim-
plifies future infrastructure and applications decisions and pro-
‘motes shared understanding of IT capabilities in the enterprise,

--- PAGE 27 ---
er IT GOVERNANCE

‘An enterprise architecture defines data and infrastructure @> a
stable platform supporting faster-changing applications, Business
needs change constantly, so enterprises must build flexibility into
their architectures, But applications need a base on which to build,
Shared inftastructure and data provide the base. At MetLife the
shared customer data and single-portal interface will support future
applications without limiting the firm’s ability to offer related ser-
vices of seek new markets, Many manufacturing firms, in contrast,
implement ERPs, which establish a set of standardized manutactur-
ing and supply chain processes as the base for future applications
{As long as an enterprise does not change its fundamental mission,
the infrastructure defined by its enterprise architecture should sup-
port its business applications, The distinction between infrastruc:
ture and applications thus allows enterprises to leverage economies
of scale while retaining flexibility to respond to change,

Currently, most enterprise architectures specify infrastructure,
data, and applications. Increasingly, architectures will specify coms
ponents. Components take an enterprise's applications and in-
frastructure and tum them into specified, reliable, and modular
services, For example, an insurance company might have an uncler-
wilting component servicing multiple applications, while a manue
facturing firm might develop a pricing service for multiple ap-
plications. Component architectures provide another layer of
Standardization, helping enterprises achieve business objectives for
efficiency, economies of scale, andl reuse. Early components tend 10
be ennterprisewide infrastructure services, like MetLife's single sis
on, Over time, enterprises will identify the shared, recasting appli-
cation needs of their processes and create components available to
all business units

“rhe ability to design and build a component-based architecture
will grow out of an enterprise's experience with specifying and then
implementing technical, data, and process standards, Some enter-
prises are moving rapidly toward component-based architectures;
others have barely begun the journey.

T Infrastructure

TY infrastructure is the foundation of planned TT capability (both
technical and human) available throughout the business as shared

Five Key IT Decisions: Making IT a Strategic Asset an

and reliable services and used by multiple applications * Foresight
in establishing the right infrastructure at the right time enables
rapid implementation of future electronically enabled business
initiatives as well as consolidation and cost reduction of current
business processes. Overinvesting in infrastructure—oF worse, 11+
plementing the wrong infrastructure—results in wasted resources,
(jolays, and system incompatibilities with business partners, Host:
ver, underinvesting in infrastructure results ii rushed implemen:
tations to meet business deadlines, islands of automation meeting
focal needs without integration across the enterprise, and limited
sharing of resources, information, and expertise, Thhus, the focus
dnd timing of infrastructure initiatives can have a significant im-
pact on the enterprise's performance.

In the typical enterprise, infrastructure accounts for about $§
percent of the total T investment, Figure 2-3 shows the varlous ele:
vents of TT infrastructure, At the base of figure 2-3 are the technol:
oxy components, such as computers, printers, database softicare
packages, operating systems, and scanners. These devices are con»
nodities and readily available in the marketplace, The technology
components are converted into tseful shared services by a human
IT infrastructure composed of knowledge, skills, standards, and

experience.

‘An enterprise’s infrastructure services often Include telecom
munication network services, provision and management of large:
scale computing (Such as servers or mainframes), management of
Shared customer databases, research and development expertise
aimed at identifying the uselulness of emerging technologies to the
business, and an cnterprisewide intranet, These services can be pro-
vided internally ot by outsourcers such as IBM Global Services,
‘Accenture, and Hewlett-Packard, An enterprise's internal infrastruc
ture often links to external industry infrastructures such. as bank.
payments systems and to public infrastructures such as the Internet
and telecommunications networks.

‘The services notion of TT’ infrastructure is very powerful, as
managers can more readily value a service than a technical compo-
nent such as a server or software package. In addition, the service
Of providing a fully maintained laptop computer with access (0
all of the enterprise's systems and the Internet can be specified mea-
ured, and controlled in a service-level agreement, Perhaps most

--- PAGE 28 ---
rraure 2-9

ive Key IT Decisions: Making IT a Strategic Asset 7

importantly, managers can price services in the marketplace for
comparison.

‘An increasing number of enterprises have an additional layer of
standard applications used by all business units. We refer to these
shared and standard applications as infrastructure applications.
‘They include enterprise systems such as ERPs, customer relation-
ship management systems (CRMs), and supply chain management
systems (SCMs) as well as functional systems supporting shared
services such as accounting, human resource management, and
budgeting, Infrastructure applications are more stable, changing
less with evolving business strategies than do the local applica-
tions. The local applications, which sit atop the infrastructure, rep-
resent the remainder of an enterprise's IT portfolio. These applica-
tions change frequently—often every time there is a new product
or service feature or when implementing strategic experiments in
response to sensing a market opportunity.

‘An integrated IT infrastructure combines all the enterprise's
shared IT capability into a platform for electronically conducted
business. An integrated infrastructure has ten capability clusters
(figure 2-4) with sets of services in each cluster.”

‘An integrated infrastructure provides capability to the enter-
prise’s local IT applications, depicted by the four short rods near the
| top of the infrastructure in figure 2-4. The infrastructure connects

externally to business partners via agreed-upon standards, as illus-
trated at the bottom of figure 2-4. Business partners obtain elec:
tronic access via integrated electronic channels, Usually the channels
include all or some of a physical outlet (for example, a store or
branch with a point-of-sale device), the Web, e-mail, physical mail
(scanned), interactive voice response, wireless devices such as cell
phones, kiosks, and a direct point-to-point connection (a private
network, for example). In most cases, enterprises try to make their
applications “channel independent,” meaning that consistent anc!
up-to-date data are available regardless of how a customer makes
| contact.
| ‘All communications pass through a security and risk capability,
which provides security through technologies (for example, fire-
| walls and encryption) and policies (remote access, use of pass-

words, and so on), as well as disaster planning and recovery. The

databave software,

g
i

ications such as insurance clara
“customer complaints support

changing local business appl

u
#
i
u
ii

processing, Web bank loan applications,
Syetem, pone order support systems
‘Commodities such a8 computers, printer, rout
‘operating systems, credk card swipers

Fi

“experince bincs components

\
\

— tT

=]

+

‘Shared and standard
TT applications

‘Share infermation technalogy services|

oF +
Human information technology infrastructure

/

--- PAGE 29 ---
38 IT GOVERNANCE

FIGURE 2-4

IT Infrastructure Services in Ten Clusters

oe

ata management
Communications
Security ae is
Integrate eocronlecharvsis
~ —
[Foestuponsieacs ]
——
Customers, business parinrs, public infrastructures

Sure: Pees ell Mari Subs and tarnne Broabent,“Bulcng hasta fo Slag
ality MF Stan Marapement Bovis 8 90,1 32002; 57-8,

electronic interactions within the enterprise and with customers
and partners occur via the set of communications services including
‘broadband, intranet, and workstation networks. Data management
encompasses database management, middleware management, and
data exchange translations. Many IT units are isolating in master
files enterprisewide data on customers, products, and employees so.
that critical data elements are accessible to individuals and applica-
tions as needed.

Closely aligned with data management are the enterpriseswide
infrastructure applications that capture, update, and access enterprise
data. Operations and management of these applications constitutes
another set of infrastructure services. IT facilities management spans
the physical infrastructure layers described so far, providing ser-
vices such as large-scale processing, server farms, and a common
systems development environment,

Five Key IT Decisions:

faking IT a Strategic Asset 39

‘The six preceding infrastructure capability clusters support the
physical elements of infrastructure. The remaining four clusters
are the management-oriented infrastructure capabilities. The IT
management services coordinate the integrated enterprise infra-
structure and manage relationships with the business units. Typi-
cally the management services include IS planning, project man-
agement, service-level agreements, and negotiations with vendors
and outsourcers. The IT architecture and standards infrastructure
services provide the migration plan for the detailed technical stan-
dards underlying the enterprise architecture. Architecture services
include monitoring the effectiveness of the enterprise's standards
and identifying when those standards are outdated or too costly to
support. IT education artd training includes training in the use of the
enterprise's specific technologies and systems as well as general
management education about how to envision, invest in, and use
IT to create business value. IT’ researcit and development includes
the enterprise's efforts in looking for new ways to use IT to create
business value and to assess new technologies. R&D sits at the
intersection of IT management and IT architecture services be-
‘cause R&D links development of standards to the needs of the
‘business. Infrastructure capability is difficult to create because it is
a complex fusion of technology and human assets. These capabili-
ties require long lead times to develop and can therefore be @
source of competitive advantage. Enterprises with greater infra-
structure capability have faster times to market, higher growth
rates, and more sales from new products but lower short-term
profitability. In that sense, building a strong infrastructure is like
purchasing an options If leveraged effectively through the imple-
mentation of new business applications, infrastructure can gener-
ate improved financial performance; otherwise, it will prove an
unnecessary cost

A superior IT infrastructure contains an integrated set of ser-
vices in each of the ten capability clusters consistent with the enter-
prise’s strategic direction. Enterprises that manage infrastructure as,
an asset and invest carefully each and every year typically perform
better than enterprises that take a “big bang” approach to IT infra-
structure. UPS, for example, has an infrastructure renewal strategy
to balance infrastructure investment over time:

--- PAGE 30 ---
40 IP GOVERNANCE

On the infrastructure I know that we must bite this off and do
some each year, You can put things off, but eventually you'se going
to get caught. So I ty to make sure funds are available to refresh

continually, which is not a real popular thing,

Ken Lacy, CIO, UPS

Individual IT infrastructure services can be located at an enter
prisewide or business unit level, Many enterprises are shifting busi-
ness unit infrastructure capability to enterprise level to achieve
business objectives such as a single point of customer contact or
economies of scale, Determining where to locate infrastructure ser-
vices, how to price services, when to update services, and whether
to outsource services ate key infrastructure decisions, Getting infra:
structure right means providing cost-elfective services that position
the enterprise for rapid adoption of new business applications.

Decision 4: Business Applications Needs

Although all five [P decisions are concerned with the business value
OF IT, itis decisions about specific business needs that directly gen=
erate value, Even as Schwab, Amazon.com, Cisco, and others dem
onstrate the potential benefits of strategic IT applications, spectacu:
lar failures of large systems implementations at companies like
Hershey, Whielpool, and Allied Waste serve as reminders that cefin-
ing and delivering value through business applications remains a
significant organizational challenge.

Identification of business needs for I applications often has
two conflicting objectives—creativity and discipline, Creativity is
about identifying new and more effective ways to deliver customer
value using IT, Creativity involves identifying business applications
that support strategic business objectives and facilitate business
experiments, Discipline is about architectural integrity—ensuring
that applications leverage and build out the enterprise architecture
rather than undermine architectural principles. Discipline is also
about focus—committing the necessary resources to achieve proj-
ect and business goals. We will discuss the management decisions
that lead to creative, disciplined business applications.

five Key IT Devisions: Making IT a Strategic Asset 4

Fostering Creative Solutions

Finite resources—including IT skills, management attention,
and business unit personnel—demand that new IT applications not
only meet a minimum ROI test; they must contribute strategic
value to the enterprise, At most enterprises, strategic applications
focus on core processes, In large enterprises, core processes often
spin multiple functions and business units. For example, Partners
Healthcare, a Boston-based umbrella organization of major hospi-
tals and local clinics, is developing a Longitudinal Medical Record
(LMR) system. Introduced in 1998, the LMR supports Partners’ dual
missions of medical research and practice. LMR requires physicians
to enter electronically, in a standard format, all diagnosis andl treat=
ment information so the system can highlight key facts for physie
clans examining the patient in the future, The device also stores
data on treatments and outcomes to facilitate research and inform
future practice, The LMR is a strategic system for Partners,

Similarly, manufacturing firms continue to invest in ERPs to
cnable operating efficiencies and seamless supply chains, Financial
services firms are implementing customer relationship manag
‘ment systems to enable a single view of the customer, Retail firms
are integrating back-end processes to support their online stores
and point-of-sale systems, These systems are all intended to fun=
damentally improve enterprises’ business processes. Value results
from their ability to change how the enterprise does business, Deci-
sions about business application needs involve identifying core
Processes and determining what process and system changes can
deliver significant benefits to the enterprise, Successful strategic
system implementations demand business leaders with the vision
to define and implement the change

In addition to reinforcing the enterprise’s core processes, deci
sions about business application needs are important for respond-
ing to market changes. Enterprises need a constant flow of experi-
ments to seize new market opportunities and avoid obsolescence.
Some experiments will develop into strategic systems; others will
fold quickly. The flow of experiments generates creative energy arid
continually alerts managers to changing market conditions so that
they can iclentify the next big thing.

--- PAGE 31 ---
42 IT GOVERNANCE

‘The development of UPS's DIAD, the device that collects elec-
onic signatures, is an example of how experiments can evolve
into strategic systems. The initial objective of the DIAD was simply
to provide a printed delivery record to replace the driver's hand=
written delivery record, Version 1 of the DIAD delivered the in-
tended functionality, but its value was limited because, although it
delivered the printed record, it slowed the delivery process. How-
ever, the experiment revealed the potential of the DIAD to save
Grivers time and collect real-time data for other customer services.
The DIAD ultimately saved each of more than fifty thousand UPS
drivers about a half hour at the endl of the day by accumulating
information on each driver's deliveries, Subsequent versions of the
DIAD tied into the continuously Improving UPS tracking systems,
eventually making the device a strategic platform for new customer
services,

dentifying business experiments that have the potential to be-
come strategically important may be more an art than a science.
Enterprises such as Fidelity have created incubators and usability
labs to test new technologies and to pilot new concepts, Since some
experiments will necessarily fail, enterprises need approaches to
identifying, funding, and assessing experiments so that they can
sustain a constant flow of creative ideas but back out of unsuccess-
ful projects before they have invested large amounts of money.

Disciplined Execution.

Creutive solutions can generate interesting technical challenges,
particularly when enterprises purchase vendor packages intended
to meet their needs. ‘Traditionally, enterprises—and their IT units—
were reluctant to establish technical standards that might limit
business functionality. Increasingly, however, managers have found
that 80 percent solutions can offer significant business value while
reducing technical risks and project costs. Successful enterprises
consistently demonstrate a willingness to sacrifice functionality to
sustain architectural integrity. The C1O at MeadWestvaco described
the model: “The role of my chief technology officer is to, in effect,
oversee the architecture and to ensure that the architecture over
time evolves to achieve our desired results, The default condition is
you must choose applications that fit within the context of our

Five Key IT Decisions: Making [Ta Strategic Asset 43

architecture, If it’s a compelling application, go find one that works
with this, We'll have a conversation if you can’t find one.”

Of course, every enterprise encounters strategic business oppor
lunities that challenge the architecture, Often the challenge helps
to establish when an architectural design or technical standard has
become outdated. Thus decision makers must recognize when archi-
tecture sensibly limits business application choices and when new.
business opportunities should lead to new architectures or changes
in technology standards.

Sustaining architectural integrity, however, is not just a matter
of monitoring the adoption of technical standards by individual
projects. Large enterprises undertake hundreds of projects simulta-
neously. sAn enterprise's project portfolio invariably has multiple
projects with similar or overlapping requirements. For example, a
umber of business units might simultancously develop appli-
cations with requirements for tracking customer interactions, for
managing the flow of documents associated with a process, of
for computer telephony integration (the ability of a call center repre
sentative to view a Web page in use by a customer). ‘the architec:
ture of an enterprise may not address these new capabilities, so a set
of applications can result in multiple disparate solutions to the
same problem. Most firms have struggled to manage overlapping
system requirements, and the net effect has been redundant capa-
bilities, wasted resources, and slow time to market,

Sustaining architectural integrity thus demands coordinating
the architectural demands of an enterprise's project portfolio, USAA,
a diversified financial services firm, has designed this coordination
responsibility into its Enterprise Business Operations unit, which
reports to the CEO, This unit works with IT architects to identify
common needs actoss the firm’s several hundred business unit and
enterprisewide projects, Each IT architect accepts responsibility for
defining architecture components that can be shared by multiple
projects. The enterprise architecture unit within tf commits to
specifying standard products to address new capabilities by a spect
fied date. Projects are then scheduled based on availability of needed
infrastructure and business process components,

Specifying the functionality and architectural requirements
of an IT project is only the first step in generating value from IT.

--- PAGE 32 ---
44 IT GOVERNANCE

Business value results from the organizational changes that IT
enables, ‘Thus business application decisions also involve assigning,
accountability for the organizational change associated with an IT.
ptoject. At Partners, for example, physicians “owning” responsi-
bility for generating value from the Longitudinal Medical Record
invest personal resources to use the system, provide constant feed
back on its features, and encourage colleagues Lo sign on to the
project.

‘The organizational changes associated with many systems ate
wrenching. ‘They not only require that individuals change their
habits, they typically require a new understanding of organiza-
tional processes. Changing compensation structures is often « re
quirement for motivating new behavior, but changing compen-
sation is not enough, Employees implementing change must
understand the new processes. They may need both training and
structural support, Change management is « difficult challenge in
environments where change is constant, New systems and pro-
cesses may confuse rather than support employees regardless of
their commitment to organizational objectives. Key processes in
nterprises are often receiving multiple “fixes” at one time, ‘To en=
sure that an enterprise and its people can absorb ongoing change,
many enterprises have organized their projects into a finite set of
programs. ‘Iypically, programs consist of all projects related ta a
major process initiative such as customer relations, product de-
velopment, of financial management, Programs ate headed by
high-level managers who coordinate the system features, timing,
taining, and change management requirements of each project.
Program managers are accountable for ensuring that new systems
have the intended combined effect on the enterprise and that re-
sources are used effectively.

Business application needs decisions require reconciling com-
plex change and opposing organizational forces. Managers respon-
sible for defining requirements must distinguish core process re-
quirements from nonessentials and know when to live within
architectural constraints. They must design experiments knowing
that actual benefits could be different from anticipated benefits—or
if there are no benefits, they must pull the plug. Most importantly,
they must know how to design organizational change and then

Five Key IT Decisions: Making IT a Strategic Asset 4s

make it happen, Business application needs decisions require cre-
ative thinkers and disciplined project managers and are probably
the least mature of the five IT decisions.

Decision 5:1T Investment and Prioritization

A leader of a $15 billion retail enterprise told us, “IT investments
are like any other investment, You must make a decent return or
you go bust, It just happens faster with 1!" The IT investment deci-
sion Js often the most visible and controversial of the five key I
decisions. Some projects are approved, others are bounced, and the
rest enter the organizational equivalent of suspended animation
with the dreaded request from the decision makers to “redo the
business case” or “provide more information.” Enterprises that get
superior value from IT focus their investments on their strategic:
priorities, cognizant of the distinction between “must have" and
nice to have” IT capabilities.

IT investment decisions address three dilemmas: (a) how much
to spend, (b) what to spend it on, and (c) how to reconcile the
heeds of different constituencies, We will discuss each of these
dilemmas, noting that IP governance is an invaluable tool for re=
solving differing views

How Much to Spend

‘The IT investment process must determine how much to spend
on IT, Given the uncertain returns on IT spending, many execu-
tives wonder whether they are spending loo much—or perhaps
even too little, They often look to industry benchmarks as a way.
of determining appropriate spending levels. But in the successful
companies we have studied, benchmarks are only a starting point.
Senior managers focus on the strategic role that IT plays in the
organization and establish an enterprisewide funding level that will
enable technology to fulfill its objective.

UPS and Federal Express provide a useful example of why
benchmarks are only the starting point. Both companies report
spending around $1 billion on IT each year, but FedEx, which has
annual revenues of around $20 billion, is two thirds the size of UPS.
‘The different spending levels reflect different strategic roles for

--- PAGE 33 ---
46 IT GOVERNANCE

‘The UPS IT strategy, which evolved from industrial engineering
roots, focuses on introducing efficiencies into a business that de-
mands consistency and reliability. In contrast, FedEx relies on IT’ to
provide extraordinary responsiveness to unique customer needs, OF
course, UPS also uses technology to meet the needs of individual
customers, and FedEx uses technology to provide consistent service
across customer segments. But the thrust of the two companies’ IT
and business strategies is different, Both are successtul because they
have matched their spending levels to theie strategies

I’ Investment Portfolio

How to Allocate IT Dollars:

As with any investment portfolio, managing the ( portlolio
requires providers and consumers to agree on indicators of success,
Different strategic contexts lead to enterprises having different ley-
els of IT investment, different IT portfolios, and different indicators
of success. We found that enterprises with better returns from IP
pay particular attention to these indicators. In these enterprises
each year, as part of the investment process, business and IT man-
agement agree on the appropriate indicators for the business value
of the portfolio.

As a commercial lens on IT investments, many enterprises find
it useful to think of an enterprise’s IT investments as a portfolio,
just as individual investors have portfolios of financial invest-
ments." Portfolio management enables decision makers to align
their portfolios with enterprise strategy and balance risk and re-
Lum, Just as personal investment portfolios are rewelghtedl as per-
sonal goals change (for example, approaching retirement), IV port-
folios are also reweighted as conditions change.

Implementing an IY portfolio manayement approach requires
the dollars for each project or budget line item to be classified into
categories reflecting business objectives, Grouping proposed invest:
ments by business objective enables management to select projects
‘that shape the porttolio to the enterprise's strategy. Having data on
how an enterprise's investments in each category have performed
historically helps make more informed future investment deci
sions—similar to knowing the historical return of bonds versus
equities versus property.

we Key I Decisions: Making TT a Strategic Asset 47

One approach to IT portfolio analysis lists four IT asset classes,
each supporting a different management objective: strategic (to
gain competitive advantage), informational (to provide informa.
tion), transactional (Lo process transactions and cut costs), and in-
frastructure (to provide shared services and integration).!! Classify
ing the enterprise's annual investments into these four categories
facilitates strategic analysis and raises questions about specific in-
vestment decisions. For example, in an economic dawntum, do we
really want to allocate 40 percent of this year’s IT investment to the
high-risk, high-return strategic asset class? Instead, should we re-
weight the portfolio oward the low-risk, solic-return transactional
investment asset class? Alternatively, can we afford to have another
year of low infrastructure investment?

Growing numbers of enterprises are using IT portfolio ap-
proaches as part of thelr enterprisewide IT investment and priotiti=
zation process." These enterprises tailor the definition of the asset
classes to fit their specific business and develop metries to help
assess the performance of their IT Investments, The IP portfolio
concept assists managers in balancing and realigning their in
vestments when the enterprise's strategy or the economic climate
changes, Comparisons of portiotios with industry benchmarks
facilitate a discussion on how well aligned an IT portfolio is with
the strategy and allow managers to make more informed invest
ment decisions relative to the competition. A powerful question to
ask is: Can we explain differences between our IT investment port=
folio and the industry benchmark by our strategy? If the explana-
tion is credible, the portfolio is a good fit. If the explanation is un-
convincing, the IT investment process is failing,

Risks ace inherent in any business investment decision, and
senior executives ate familiar with risk assessment, IT investments
can expose firms to four kinds of risk: market, financial, organiza-
tional, and technical, Enterprises often have well-developed tem
plates for IT’ investment proposals that require the articulation of
each type of risk, In addition, the portfolio of IT investments carries
risk—not unlike the tisk of a portfolio of stocks. If well selected, the
portfolio of IT investments, like that of individual stocks, can re-
duce overall risk to the owner

--- PAGE 34 ---
a8 IT GOVERNANCE

How to Reconcile Differing Needs.
Aligning Ir Investment with Strategic Priorities

Probably the most important attribute of a successful IT invest-
ment process is ensuring that the enterprise's IT spending reflects
strategic priorities. Investment processes must reconcile the de-
mands of individual business units as well as demands to meet
enterprisewide needs. Many enterprises value the independence of
their business units and support their efforts to invest in IT accord-
ing to business unit strategy. Most enterprises also emphasize the
importance of enterprisewide efficiencies and even integration, En-
terprises that attempt to persuade independent business units to
fund shared infrastructure are likely to experience resistance, In-
stead, business leaders must articulate the enterprisewide objectives
of shared infrastracture and provide appropriate incentives for
business unit leaders to sacrifice business unit needs in favor of
enterprisewide needs,

‘The IY investment decision-making process can be used to im-
plement strategic change as illustrated at State Street Corporation.2?
Hraditionally, IT investments at State Street involved some rela-
tively small funding of central services. Each business then inde-
pendently assigned additional funding based on business priorities.
A disadvantage of this approach is that many similar initiatives
could be funded in different businesses. Recognizing this limita-
tion, State Street’s senior leadership moved to enterprisewide IT
budget management to achieve a better return on IT investment.

In 2001, State Street’s Information Technology Executive Com-
‘mittee (ITEC) assumed responsibility for combining IT investment
needs of individual businesses into an enterprisewide IT budget

rhe executives serving on the ITEC included the COO, the Chief
Asset Officer (CAO), the CIO, and senior executives responsible for
State Street’s various business units, In the fall, the leaders of each
business and the CIO identified key IT business and infrastructure
projects for the coming year and classified them according to their
contribution to the corporate growth targets and to the strategy of
each business, ‘The result of this analysis created an initial portfolio
of all IT projects recommended for the coming year. The ITEC then
negotiated to create the optimal enterprisewide IT portfolio that

Five Key IT Decisions: Making IT a Strategic Asset 49

met the corporate growth targets within the operating budget allo-
cated to IT. A member of the C10’s stafl identified several advan-
tages of using the ITEC for budgeting compared with earlice [T ine
vestment committees. “The negotiation of an enterprisewide IT
budget encourages value in the use of IT rather than focusing on
the needs of individual businesses. The business executives do not
always appreciate the impact of enterprisewide infrastructure in-
vestment. By combining discussion of infrastructure investment
with these business initiatives they understand the value of making
that investment in enterprisewide infrastructure because they're all
going to share in its use.”

IT investment and prioritization puts money to work. If senior
management has not clarified or communicated enterprise strategy
or if strategy changes so frequently that It isn’t worth investing in
today’s strategy, the IT investment process will break down. No
framework or analysis can substitute for clear strategic direction.
When the investment committee understands its business objec.
tives, it can invest IT dollars to generate a significant return.

The five I decisions we've discussed in this chapter cannot be
isolated from one another. If governance is well designed, the deci-
sions reinforce one another ensuring strategic objectives are suc-
cesslully addressed, In the next section, we describe an TT-enabled
transformation at Delta Air Lines. This case study provides an ex-
ample of how one firm designed governance to consider the inter-
actions of all five IT decisions.

Case Study:
Making IT Decisions at Delta Air Lines

When Leo Mullin became CEO of Delta Air Lines in 1997, he took
over the third largest U.S, airline in terms of revenues and passen-
ger miles and the largest US. airline in terms of number of de-
partures and passengers enplaned. Delta had 84,000 employecs fly-
ing approximately 117 million customers to 45 states within the
United States and 44 cities in 28 countries throughout the world.!*

Mullin found that Delta's IT capability, which had been out-
sourced in the early 1990s, was functionally oriented, Each of the
firm's approximately seventeen functional units was developing

--- PAGE 35 ---
50 IT GOVERNANCE

and supporting systems in isolation from the rest of the firm,
‘Mullin asked Charlie Feld, former ClO at Frito-Lay and Burlington
Northern, to assess the IT capability at Delta, Feld reported that
people at Delta could not obtain basic information from their
systems. Given the nature of the airline business, the functional
orientation of the firm's information systems was limiting the
ability of employees to do their jobs, When a flight was delayed.
or changed for any reason, customer-facing employees could not
always determine the whereabouts of planes, passengers, or bags.
According to Feld:

The reason they didn’t know where anything was is that the sy’
tems infrastzuctuce was so disconnected, There were thirty-five
‘customer databases, dozens of Hlight databases. If a gate changed,

Uhey wouldn't know, The baggage handler would be standing
there at the old gate waiting for the plane to show up. The passen-
{gers would be standing in the concourse looking at the displays,
and they would have the wrong gate. You'd go into the Crown
Room and there would be a different gate, And the poor gate
ayent was standing there and they didn't have any idea, because it
‘was so disconnected from the information in real tine, The physi-
cal event of a gate change was not reflected in the electronic sys-
tem in a consistent, timely way.

Faced with imminent Y2K issues, Mullin persuaded Feld to take
on the role of C10 at Delta until January 1, 2000. Rather than sim-
ply fix the technology to survive Y2K, Mullin and Feld committed
to restoting IT as a strategic lool at Delta. They engaged a small
team of senior executives—inchucling the chief financial officer, the
executive vice president of customer service, and the head of airline
operations—to lead an organizational transformation built around
‘the assumption of real-time information.

‘The executive team, which came to be known as the IY Board,
took responsibility for defining the role of IT in the firm, They
stated four principles:

+ Adopt a process view of the firm.
© Build a corporate infrastructure to support cross-functional
processes.

Five Key IT Decisions: Making [Ta Strategic Asset si

* Build and leverage a standardized environment.
+ Focus on the customer,

Consistent with these principles, Feld worked with the Board to
create an enterprise architecture (figure 2-5). First, the IT Board
specified the firm's core processes: (1) customer experience, (2) ait-
Jine operations, (3) digital dashboard for revenue management,
and (4) wired workforce for administrative functions. Recognizing
that they could not develop and implement IT support for all four
cote processes at one time, the Board chose to fix flight operations
and customer experience, the two processes that ran on the firm's
outdated airport-based technologies.

Management defined the information requirements for these
two core processes in terms of nine databases: location, schedule,
fight, maintenance, equipment, employee, aizcralt, customer, and.
ticket. A key component of the architecture was the Della Nervous
System (DNS), a middleware environment that captured and dis-
seminated data to employees and applications. The DNS used a
“publish and subscribe” approach—applications subscribe to be
notified whenever certain data items change so that employees
always have current data, and applications respond to changes as
needed, Vicky Escarra, Executive Vice President for Customer Ser-
vice, explained:

‘The whole notion around the Delta Nervous System is if we had a
change in our operations control center—let’s say a canceled
flight—with one or bvo entries, that information would be pustied.
into all of the operating and customer groups without an individ
ual or twenty-five individuals having to actually access or send
that information, The information would come to the reservae
tions call centers; it would go to the airports, ... the Crown Room
Clubs, .. . [and] customer PDAs, cell phones, beepers, even cus-
‘tomes’ laptops, giving them the information around the fact that
“Plight 222 ftom Washington to Atlanta has canceled, and we've
rebooked you on Flight 223 that leaves two hours from now.”

‘The enterprise architecture in figure 2-5 reflected the core pro-
cesses, the data driving those core processes, and the channels
delivering data to employees, customers, and business partners

--- PAGE 36 ---
riaure 2-5

Detta’s Enterprise Architecture

cael Approve werk paca 17,

Five Key IT Decisions: Making [Ta Strategic Asset 53

From this architecture, IT leaders could develop infrastructure
requirements. The key infrastructure requirement was highly cen-
tralized, standardized, secure data accessible to a broad set of stake-
holders through a wide variety of channels, Delta IT leaders de-
signed channel management, communication, data, and security
services to mect these requirements.

Although the enterprise architecture did not detail the applica-
tions required to support the core processes, it identified the Ke
activities associated with both the customer experience and flight
operations. The IT Board established priorities for application de-
velopment projects.

The focus on a few projects enabled the enterprise to address
Y2K concerns and fulfill their priorities for customer service and
reliable operations. Senior Vice President and Chief Development
Officer Keith Halbert noted that the IT Board’s leadership enabled
Delta to avert the Y2K crisis and incrementally address core process
improvements: “Through their teaching and through their re-
inforcement in their staff meetings and through their direction in.
terms of prioritization, and more importantly, when their teams
came through the back door to try to change their priorities, their
reinforcement of the plan really made a big difference.”

“The enterprise architecture was only partly built out by January
1, 2000, but it was sufficient for surviving the ¥2K transition. CEO
“Mullin credited Delta's infrastructure transformation with helping
the firm develop strong financials (relative to its competitors}. In a
few years, Delta moved from last to first on key industry measures
such as on-time departures and fewest customer complaints. The
IT Board became a permanent fixture, responsible for specifying
IT priorities. The Board invested simultaneously in infrastructure
and applications. Infrastructure investments supported the cross-
functional requirements of the core processes and provided a foun-
dation for future applications. Delta continues to invest in the
Delta Nervous System, which has proved a flexible platform for
quickly implementing new strategic initiatives such as printing
boarding passes at home and proactively rerouting passengers from
delayed flights. Delta’s success resulted, in part, from a clear strate-
gic vision and from having the right people involved in each of the
five key IT decisions.

--- PAGE 37 ---
sa IT GOVERNANCE

Linking the Five IT Decisions

‘The Delta experience underscores the interrelationships of the five
key IT decisions. Each of the five decisions requires individual
attention, but none of them can be mace in isolation. No wonder
If governance is hard! But while all decisions require management
attention, a clearly articulated governance approach distributes the
decision-making process to persons best positioned to understand
the requirements—and their implications. In addition, formalizing
input to decisions through governance processes ensures critical
communication and feedback on these key IT decisions.

‘As a chapter summary and primer for governance design, we
composed a series of questions representative of each IT decision
(figure 2-6), Effectively answering these and similar questions is the
job of the people tasked with making the decisions as designated by
the governance design. Do you have the right people making these
decisions? Are they well equipped to deal with the tradeoff? In the
next chapter we discuss the options enterprises have for allocating
both decision rights and input responsibilities for each IT decision.

Fiaure 2-6

Questions Key to Each IT Decision

ITprincipes

‘What isthe enterprise's operating model?
‘What isthe roe of {Tn the business?
What are Tdesrable behaviors?

How wil Tbe funded?

\Winat are he core business processes ofthe enterprise? How are
‘hey rolatod?|

{mat information dives these cove processes? How must re
data be integrated?

‘Wat technical capabilities shoul be standardized erterpriso-
‘wide to suppor IT eficiencies and faciate process standarciza-
tion and integration?

‘What actiities must be standardized enterprisewide to support
data integeaion?

\What technology choices will guide the enterprise's approach to
I intiatves?

architecture

ive Key [7 Decisions: Making [T'a Strategic Asset

at intasracture sees ae ost rato cleo the
emenprisa’s stratogic adjectives? noi

For cach cepabilty cluster what ivastructure services shoulel
’be implomented enterprisewide and wnat are te service-level
requirements of those services?

How shouldintrastructure services De priced?
Wiha the plan for keeping undertying technologies up to date?
‘What intastucture services should be outsourced?

‘at arth mart and tubes process Separate for new
business applications? Pron

How wo expwient esd to assess what thy av
successful? hid

How can busnes raed be adcessod win aeiet tan
cards When doe abuses needy an cepa rad?

‘Who wai own tho outcomes of each projet and institute
expanizationa changes to ensure the value?

M investment
{and prioritization

\Winat procoss changes or enhank
important to the entespive?

{at re he arbuton te cue an propsed I porta
sand proposed portion?
Ave these portion contr uh th werpoo stole
cbiectee

What i the relativ imporsance of enterprisewige versus business
Unit investments? Do actual investment practices rtlct thelr
relative importance?

wots are strategically mast

'DETUS RIT Shan Stoo! Carefree abe Oysters Resa (IS.

--- PAGE 38 ---
IT Governance
Archetypes for Allocating
Decision Rights

IN A RECENT SESSION of MIT Sloan School of Management's
“IP for the Non-IT Executive” two-day program, one of the authors
asked the attendees what words they would use to describe their
enterprise's IT governance. Following are some of the answers

What IT governance?

Anarchy!

Depends on the amount of money involved.

Let me ask my CIO.

The business units make all the strategic decisions.

Joint decision making between the business unit heads and

the central IT group.

Senior management lays down the law.

My IT folks manage those things.

Some of the attendees knew how they governed IT, Others did
not. The entire group was searching for a tool they could apply to
design governance for their enterprise and also use to Tearn from,
other enterprises. Representing and analyzing decision rights is
ctitical to IT governance. The purpose of this chapter is to provide a

7

--- PAGE 39 ---
IT GOVERNANCE

set of archetypes and thus choices for IT decision rights. The chap-
ter uses these archetypes to describe how firms make IT decisions
and provides three cases of IT governance in growth-seeking firms.

‘This chapter explores the question: Who should make gover-
nance decisions? We focus on “typical” patterns to examine the
variety of choices and rationales driving IT governance arrange-
ments. In chapter 4 we will describe the mechanisms enterprises
used to implement governance. In chapter 5 we will explore how
top-performing firms govern differently.

To understand how enterprises govern, we describe the gover-
nance arrangements of the 256 enterprises we surveyed. These en-
terprises were large, with an average of eight business units.! The
average enterprise invested 8 percent of its total expenses in IT and
employed 850 IT professionals. Ninety percent of the CIOs who
completed our survey had enterprisewide responsibility for IT.
Nearly half of the enterprises had highly autonomous business
units but designed governance arrangements to create or capitalize
on synergies across the business units. Most of the rest of the enter-
prises had less autonomous business units with significant synergy
among their business units

Archetypes

We use political archetypes (monarchy, feudal, federal, duopoly,
anarchy) to describe the combinations of people who have either
decision rights or input to IT decisions, One of these six archetypes
(Ggure 3-1) could describe how your enterprise makes one or more of
the five key IT decisions or provides input to the decision makers.

Business Monarchy

In a business monarchy, senior business executives make IT deci-
sions affecting the entire enterprise, The IT investment process
State Street Corporation introduced in 2001, described in the previ-
‘ous chapter, is a business monarchy in action. At State Street the
00, the CAO, the CIO, and the senior executives leading the var-
ious business units make up an executive committee. The CIO par-
ticipates as an equal partner with the other leaders. The senior busi-

TT Governance Archetypes for Allocating Decision Rights 59

FIGURE 3-1

IT Governance Archetypes

SIVtE WHO Has DECISION OR INPUT RiGHTS?
Business: ‘A group of business executives or individual executives (CxOs}, Includes:
Monarchy committees of senior business executives (may include Gio), Excludes

executives acting independent

Monarchy Individuals or groups of T executives

Feudat Business unit leaders, key process ovmere or thelr delegates

Federal -lovel executives and business greups (.., business units or processes)
‘may also include IT executives as additional participants. Equivalent of the
Central and state governments working together

ITDucpely MT executives and on other group (e.g, CxO or business un or process

Anarchy Each inclvidual user

| 2008 MIT Sos Sabo! Cantar iformatin yeas Resear (OIA). Lead wth arisin,

hess executives (the CxOs or C-level executives) decide as a group.
Figure 3-2 lists the distinguishing characteristics of the different
governance arrangements and how we classified the enterprises.

Typically, business monarchies rely on input for key decisions
from many sources. For example, the IT investment decisions at
enterprises such as State Street receive input from (a) the C1O’s
direct reports, (b) the IT leaders from the business units, (c) the en-
terprisewide IT budget management process, (d) service-lovel agree-
ments and chargeback, and (¢) an activity-tracking system showing
all IT resources and how they are deployed.

IT Monarchy

In an If’ monarchy, IT professionals make IT decisions. At UPS, for
example, the IT Governance Committee, which consists of senior
IT managers, makes the strategic decisions that affect I’ architec-
ture. Many other enterprises, including State Street, have an Office
of IT Architecture that makes architecture decisions. Enterprises im-
plement If monarchies in many different ways, often involving IT

--- PAGE 40 ---
60 IT GOVERNANCE

FiouRE 9-2

Key Players in IT Governance Archetypes

Business unit

Corporate IT leaders or
C-ovel ‘andlor key business

‘executives business unit IT__ process owners
Business monarchy e
HT monarchy “
Feudal “
Federal “ an v

¢ 7

Tr dvopoly

professionals from both corporate teams and business units.
DuPont, for example, has an enterprise IP architecture group with,
representatives from all regions, all strategic business units, and all
competency centers. ‘This group proposes architecture “rules” to
the senior IT management team, consisting of the corporate CIO
and the ClOs of the largest business units. ‘The senior (Tf manage-
ment team ensures the clarity of the rules anc owns the enforce-
ment of architectural standards,

Feudal

‘The feuclal model is based on the traditions of “mertie olde England”
where the princes and princesses or their designated knights make
their own decisions, optimizing their local needs. For TT governance
the feudal entity is typically the business unit, region, or function
Overall in our study, the feudal model was not very common because
‘most enterprises were looking for synergies across business units. The
feudal model does not facilitate enterprisewide decision making,

IP Governance Archetypes for Allocating Decision Rights 6

Federal

‘The federal decision-making model has a long tradition in govern-
ment. Federal arrangements attempt to balance the responsibilities
and accountability of multiple governing bodies, such as country
and states, Charles Handy, among others, has recently identified
the federal model's utility in negotiating the interests of both the
central organization (typically headquarters) and individual units.»
We defined the federal model as coordinated decision making in-
volving both the center and the business units, Unit representatives:
ina federal model could be either or both the unit leaders or busi-
ness process owners. Business unit and/or corporate IT leaders might
also be involved in federal governance as additional participants.

‘The federal model is undoubtedly the most difficult archetype
for decision making because enterprise leaders have different con-
cerns from business unit leaders, Members of a federal organization
represent their own unique responsibilities, In addition, incentive
systems often focus managers on business unit rather than enter-
prise results, The impact of shared resources on business unit pe
formance—and specifically the transfer prices charged for the re-
sources—typically raises concerns about fairness, Enterprises in the
study often used federal models for input to decisions, perhaps
because of fairness and representation issues.

In federal models, the biggest, most powerful business units
often get the most attention and have the most influence on de-
cisions, Consequently, smaller business units remain unsatisfied
and sometimes secede from the union to meet their own needs, En-
terprises enlisting federal governance structures usually rely on
management teams and executive committees to resolve inherent
conilicts.

1 Duopoly

The (Tr duopoly is a two-party arrangement where decisions repre
sent a bilateral agreement between IT executives and one other
group. The IT executives may be a central IT group or @ team of
central and business unit IT organizations. The other group may be
CxOs, business unit leaders or business process owners, oF groups

--- PAGE 41 ---
62 IT GOVERNANCE

of key system users (sce figure 3-2). A duopoly differs from a federal
model in that a federal arrangement always has both corporate and
ocal business representation, while a duopoly has one or the other
but not both and always includes IT professionals.

IT duopolies often take one of two forms: a “bicycle wheel” or a
‘shaped committee structure (figure 3-3). The bicycle wheel de-
scribes a duopoly involving the central IT group and the business
units. The IT group is at the hub and the business units are around
the rim. The spokes are the series of bilateral relationships between
the IT group and the various business units. Each business unit
gets individual attention along the spokes, but the same hub sup-
ports the whole enterprise.

‘A duopoly involving the central IT group and the senior man-
agement team (the CxOs and the heads of the business units) is
often implemented by two overlapping committees. The executive
‘committee (the horizontal part of the T) predominantly comprises
business managers. The vertical part of the T is an IT committee
predominantly comprising technical managers. A small set of peo-

FIGURE 9-2

IT commit

X= Bisnece nage
Yiitmerage

2000 MT Stan Scheel Can ntomaton Syters Resse (ISH. Used sh pemision

IT Govern

ance Archetypes for Allocating Decision Rights 63

ple participates on both committees to coordinate and ensure over-
lap. To improve coordination, the committees may meet on the
same day, say, the executive committee in the moming and the IT
committee in the afternoon, with some joint meeting time.

Overa third of the 256 enterprises used duopolies to make deci-
sions in the three less-technical IT decision domains: I principles,
business application needs, and IT investment. Duopolies also were
frequently used to provide input into architecture and infrastruc-
ture decisions. The duopoly archetype is popular partly because it in-
volves only two decision-making parties—it can achieve many of
the objectives of a federal model using a simpler management struc-
ture. Similarly, duopolies have an advantage over feudal models in
that the central IT group is often one of the few groups that sees the
enterprise as a whole and can look for opportunities for sharing
and reuse. The 11’ professionals can also manage adherence, cither
overtly or covertly, to the enterprise's IT architecture. Duopolies
often rely on relationship managers or business unit CIOs to repre-
sent business unit needs. The IT group can have a series of duopo-
lies with different business units enabling more tailored decisions in
less time. These duopolies have the advantage of focusing directly
on the needs of the business units, resulting in higher business unit
satisfaction. But duopolies with business units can be expensive
and ineffective when organizationwide issues are being decided.

Anarchy

Describing the anarchy model always brings back memories of one
author's undergraduate days when Artie the anarchist was a promi-
nent campus character. Artie railed against a number of the univer-
sity’s core principles—class attendance, grades, deadlines—but he
reserved his most vehement criticism for standards of any kind. All
enterprises have their Arties, and our own has more than its fair
share! Within an anarchy, individuals or small groups make their
own decisions based only on their local needs. Anarchies are the
bane of the existence of many IT groups and are expensive to
support and secure. Formally sanctioned anarchies were rare but
existed in our study and were supported where very rapid respon-
siveness to local or individual customer needs was required.

--- PAGE 42 ---
64 IT GOVERNANCE

How the Typical Enterprise Governs IT

‘We studied both who made each of the five decisions and who pro-
vided input to those decisions, We then categorized the enterprise's
approach by archetype (see figure 3-2). Figure 3-4 lists the percent-
ages of enterprises that used each governance archetype for each
decision, The percentages in each column add to 100 percent. The
darker shaded cells in figure 3-4 indicate the most common or typi-
cal governance patterns, with the shaded, bordered cells highlight-
ing the most common decision-making patterns.

‘The most common governance pattern allowed for broad-based
inputs with decision rights allocated to different groups dependin,
on the decision. For the three more business-oriented IT decisions
(principles, business application needs, and investment), more than

FIGURE 3.

How Enterprises Govern

eo it | infrastructure | Applostion
Principles | Architecture | "Strategios |” Neods

ncner® input [Dessicn] pat [Dscson| Trp [beseon| apt [Desc

fies [ole [eo] [ol 7) aie] sl
eww | 1 | 8 | 20 [Rae] t0 feel oa | als
Feil o 3 : Cy) | cee 2 aul ese) o 3
rem [aa +4 [ae 6 fa | ao | | x
owe | is [ae] ee | a5 | | | far] of 20
ww | o| of of 1] 0] 1] 0] s| of 4
Neon 1 2 | 0 Al o 2 0 2 F 0 oO

[Eee concn pat pata or atereeces, [Most carmen csson pte fr etn,

Tete ineach oa poco fh 258 ete

1 2000 Sean Senet

fot lation Syste Recearch (SA, Used ih pasion.

IT Governance Archetypes for Allocating Decision Rights 68

80 percent of enterprises provided inputs through a federal gover-
nance model. Committees, budgets, and cross-functional process
teams presented opportunities for input and feedback on these IT
decisions. Federal structures also supported input to the more tech-
nical IT decisions, but enterprise approaches to input on these
technical issues were more varied. Duopolies were also a popular
approach to input for technical decisions. The duopoly approach to
input for technical decisions sought similar objectives as the federal
approach, but the federal approach involved all business units to-
gether and the duopoly used a set of bilateral business unit IT rela-
tionships,

In addition to collecting intemal input for decisions, many firms
also looked externally. Vendors, business partners, consultants, in-
dustry associations, universities, and other groups provided input.
We do not generally recommend that external bodies (with the ex-
ception of for not-for-profit enterprises, discussed in chapter 7) be
given decision rights for key IT decisions, as occurs in some out-
sourcing arrangements. But external sources often provide invalu-
able input.

Compared to input processes, decision rights were much less
uniformly managed actoss different enterprises. We describe these
variations for each decision domain.

Typical Governance Arrangements for IT Principles

IT principles, which set the strategic role for IT across the enter-
rise, were decided in a variety of ways. Thirty-six percent of en-
texprises used a duopoly approach (usually IT professionals and the
Cx0s in a Tshaped duopoly), but business and IT monarchies and
federal approaches were also regularly used. We suspect that duopo-
lies in general and senior management IT cuopolies in particular
have gained favor in I’ principles decisions hecause senior man-
agers sense that they must take the lead to ensure that IT aligns
with business strategies. Working in partnership with IT leaders
in the decision process establishes realistic expectations for IT and
forces clarification of business strategy. An IT duopoly also secures
the IT unit's commitment to business principles. Just as important,
senior executives allow IT’ to shape business principles by reflecting

--- PAGE 43 ---
66 IT GOVERNANCE

IT capabilities already in place or under development. Thus, duopo-
lies are structured to leverage IT competencies in future-oriented
principles and strategies.

Like duopolies, business monarchies also enhance the like-
lihood that IT principles will be aligned with business strategy. The
leadership of the CxOs greatly enhances the likelihood that princi-
ples will be observed. But business monarchies are not without
risks. Senior managers can establish principles without providing
the governance processes, funding levels, and organizational stru
tures to achieve them. The involvement of IT-savvy senior man-
agers or the presence of a strong CIO on the executive team lessens
these risks.

Federal models for IT principles ensure business units a strong
voice in defining the role of IT. This voice is particularly valuable
where business objectives highlight the importance of business unit
autonomy. To balance the different interests of the central core and
the business units, some enterprises start with defining the role of
IT, Clear principles stating how IT will support both the center and
the business units (perhaps vie a combination of shared services
and local If units) can ease the difficulty of applying the federal
model to other decisions (for example, business application needs).

‘The 18 percent of enterprises vesting responsibility for IP prin-
Ciples in IT monarchies were assuming significant risk, If business
objectives are clearly stated, I professionals might easily translate
strategic objectives into appropriate IT principles. We have seen
very effective business/IT relationships that permitted senior man-
agement to hand off IT principles to IY leaders. However, an IT
monarchy taking responsibility for IT principles is best positioned
to develop technically sound but strategically unimportant princi-
ples. These principles will lead to an efficient but not @ business-
enabling architecture. In addition, IT monarchies making decisions
on TT principles are positioned to take the blame if systems do not
generate anticipated benefits. Worse, because business managers have
abdicated responsibility for defining targets, IT may well encounter
difficulties in getting business managers to accept responsibility for
generating the benefits—which usually means there will be few ben-
efits, Regardless of the capabilities (T delivers, if business leadets do
not assume responsibility for converting them into value, the tisk of
failure is high. With high risk comes the likelihood of frustrated

IT Governance Archetypes for Allocating Decision

67

business leaders who often respond by replacing the IT leadership or
abdicating further by outsourcing the whole “I problem.”

Typical Governance Arrangements
for IT Architecture

Over 70 percent of enterprises rely on IT monarchies to choose IT
architecture, suggesting that senior managers view architecture
more as a technical than a strategic issue. Most enterprises attempt
to incorporate business strategy considerations into architecture
decisions via inputs from federal and duopoly arrangements. How-
ever, the dominant decision-making role of IT’ in architecture de-
cisions suggests that business managers feel unqualified, uninter-
ested, or unneeded—they are confident that IT’ professionals can
‘translate IT principles into an architecture. IT professionals are typ-
ically quite comfortable taking responsibility for architecture deci-
sions, At many of the enterprises we have studied, an [Fonly team—
often with IT representatives from individual business units—is
responsible for designing and managing the architecture, which it
then communicates to the entice enterprise.

Another 15 percent of enterprises make architecture decisions
using duopolies. These duopolies ate typically a partnership be-
tween the CxOs, who provide the strategic horizon, and IT pro-
fessionals, who provide the technical and often organizational
input—a T-shaped duopoly. The duopoly approach is an overt
recognition of the dual business and technical nature of atchitec-
ture decisions.

Typical Governance Arrangements
for IT Infrastructure Strategies

Like architecture, infrastructure strategy decisions are often made
within the IT unit, Almost 60 percent of enterprises used IT’ monar-
chies to make infrastructure decisions. This arrangement gives IT
independence in designing and pricing service offerings. Johnson
& Johnson’s Networking and Computing Services (NCS) unit pro-
vides centralized infrastructure services for many of J&J’s operating
units. However, because NCS must effectively sel its services to the
operating companies, its customers’ demands strongly influence it.

--- PAGE 44 ---
68. IT GOVERNANCE

AtISJ, these demands are most often articulated by the IT people at
the operating companies, At many enterprises, however, significant
input comes from federal and duopoly arrangements. Effective 7
monarchies design infrastructures to acldress and support the appli-
cation requirements of business units.

Almost a quarter of the enterprises used a duopoly to make
infrastructure strategy decisions. Duopolies are well suited to rela-
tively quick negotiation of the business, technology, and political
issues associated with shared infrastructure services. For example,
Schneider National, a large U.S. trucking firm, uses regular meet-
ings of senior managers and key IT leaders to define infrastructure
requirements, These meetings allow senior managers to share
evolving strategies with IT executives, who can identily deficiencies
in existing capabilities and propose how the firm might leverage
the technology it has in place, The process makes IT people more
business savvy and business people more IT savvy,

‘Typical Governance Arrangements
for IT Business Application Needs

People who make business application needs decisions specify the
business needs for systems to be acquired or built in the next year
or $0. Enterprises in our study displayed a wide variety of ap-
proaches to these decisions, Federal approaches were slightly more
popular than duopolies, and there were also substantial numbers of
enterprises using feudal and business monarchies.

Federal models consider enterprise objectives in the process of
deploying local business applications. In a federal model, imple-
mentations of local business applications may replicate or cus-
tomize software adopted enterprisewide. For example, one pharma-
ceutical firm purchased an ERP for the entire enterprise, but except
for a small set of finmwide data definitions (for example, financial
data), it did not standardize the application across its regional busi-
ness units. The central team developed a model and then helped
Jocal teams configure it according to their unique needs, This ar-
rangement allowed for shared expertise across the firm but opted
for the benefits of local customization over global standardization,

IT duopolies, typically bicycle wheels, were used by 27 percent
of the enterprises, These duopolies give a stronger voice to IT in

TT Governance Auchetypes for Allocating Decision Hights oy

business application decisions, which may reflect the greater role of
architecture standards in limiting the number of choices consid-
ered for purchased applications, For example, at Commonwealth
Bank of Australia, Australia’s largest bank, with several major busi-
ness units, the central IT architecture team reviews all business
application proposals. During one reviews, the team abserved that
multiple business units were proposing similar functionality across
multiple front-end customer service platforms, The architecture
team extricated the common requirements and proposed a com
mon approach that eliminated U.S, $20 million from the business
units’ combined application proposal budget requirements, IT in-
volvement in business application decisions incteases the likeli-
hood that both technical standards and existing IT infrastructure
capabilities influence the choice of applications,%

Business application needs is the only decision where a signifi-
cant number of enterprises (18 percent) use a feudal model—inde-
pendent business units decide for themselves, Feudal models allow
for high business unit autonomy and permit business units to
move faster when they find packages or define requirements to meet
@ unique business neecl, In some enterprises the feudal model for
business application needs was balanced with more centralized
governance for IT principles and IY investment (for example, busi-
hess monarchy).

At 12 percent of the enterprises, business monarchies make ap-
lication needs decisions, Dow Corning took this approach to the
Implementation of its enterprise resource planning system, Com
mitted 10 4 global supply chain, management developed a single
instance of the software, which was installed at all 109 sites

‘Typical Governance Arrangements
for IT Investment and Prioritization

‘Theee approaches dominate IT investment and prioritization deci-
sion making—business monarchies, federal, and duopolies. ‘The
three approaches are almost equally popular, but they offer differ-
ent views of how enterprises ensure maximum value from IT in-
vestments, That only 9 percent of enterprises place IT investment
decisions in the hands of IT professionals reflects the growing
awareness that IT investment decisions involve business tradeoffs—

--- PAGE 45 ---
70 IT GOVERNANCE

decision makers determine which business processes will and will
not receive I’ support.

Business monarchies are well positioned to define and fund
business priorities. Business monarchies are typically also responsi-
ble for overall capital budgeting decisions. ‘Thus, vesting respon-
sibility for IT investment and prioritization in a business monarchy
allows IT projects to compete for funds with other organizational
needs. The competition for funding facilitates an integrated view
of the enterprise's key assets (physical, human, relationship) and
is aided by an enterprise investment committee that looks at all
major investments.

Federal approaches to IT investment balance enterprisewide
priorities with business unit priorities. At one enterprise, over 80
percent of IT’ investment funds were allocated by the senior man-
agement team, but the functional units each had an “allowance*
for business unit priorities. In contrast, firms with highly autono-
mous business units fund most IT from their regional offices, using
occasional central funding to address strategic global needs.

Duopoly approaches (often T-shaped committees) to IT invest-
ment recognize that the IT unit is uniquely positioned to identify
he risks posed by the existing IT infrastructure and the opportuni-
ties for sharing and reuse across business units. Thus, the involve-
ment of If in investment decisions provides a longer-term view of
the implications of currently funded projects. Senior executives
can simultaneously ensure that priority projects are “staged” ac-
cording to the need for and availability of needed infrastructure.
Enterprises with strong duopolies can group projects requiring new
infrastructure capabilities. This process allows faster payback on in-
frastructure because major infrastructure investments are delayed
(as are the applications requiring them) until a critical mass justifies
the investment.

Analyzing Different Governance
Patterns Across Enterprises
‘This first look at the data from our study reveals some broad pat-

terns. For example, few enterprises govern with anarchy or feudal
approaches. Many enterprises allocate responsibility for architec-

Go

mnance Aichetypes for Allocating Decision Rights a

ture and infrastructure decisions to IT specialists, Overall, however,
we found significant variation in governance patterns. Variations
result from a number of factors

1. Strategic and performance goals: Fifective governance
attempts to reinforce desirable behaviors to achieve the
enterprise’ strategic and performance goals. Because each
enterprise's goals are different, a wide variety of governance

approaches are used.

2. Organizational structure: Traditionally, enterprises have relied
on organizational structure to align decision making with
enterprise goals and strategies. However, as enterprises
attempt to address competing goals, expanding geographies,
rapid change, and intense competition, organizational struc-
tures have provided inadequate support for strategy. Enter-
prises design governance to compensate for the limitations
of structure, Given that organizations cannot rely on an or-
ganization chart to deliver strategy, they must identify pro-
cesses and governance that transcend the organization chart,

3. Governance experience: Many enterprises are relatively early
in the learning curve of IT governance effectiveness, Less-
mature enterprises change governance more often and
struggle with coordinating all their mechanisms, Individuals
within enterprises also contribute different levels of expert-
ise. IT executives learn about business strategy (and often
force clarity) and business executives learn about IT capabili-
ties through ongoing involvement in IT decisions,

4. Size and diversity: As enterprises grow and diversify—both
geographically and organizationally—they introduce com-
peting and even conflicting objectives, Desirable behaviors
‘become less clear and more contingent on circumstances as
an enterprise introduces competing objectives. Governance
must address the tradeoffs presented by competing objec
tives. Thus, the governance approach is likely to change as
the enterprise becomes more complex,

S. Industry and regional differences: Industry and regional dif
ferences create unique pressures on enterprises that are re-
flected in their IT governance. Decision-making cultures

--- PAGE 46 ---
2 IT GOVERNANCE

vary considerably across different regions of the world, often
complicating governance in global enterprises. The last sec-
tion of this chapter explores these differences and provides
the typical IT governance patterns by industry and region.
‘To aid in comparison, a series of tables summarizing the dif-
ferent approaches to governance by region and industry are
available.®

Finally, the variation in the governance arrangements reflects
varying levels of governance effectiveness. Top-performing firms
govern differently. We will explain the differences in chapter 5.
‘Now we will review the governance arrangements of DuPont, DBS
Bank, and Motorola—three excellent firms, all pursuing growth,
each applying governance arrangements specific to their needs

Case Study: DuPont

DuPont is a $25 billion manufacturer of science-based solutions in
industries spanning food and nutrition, health care, home and
construction, apparel, electronics, and transportation? The com-
pany, which celebrated its two hundredth anniversary in 2002, has
cover 79,000 employees in seventy countries. DuPont is organized
around six market-growth platforms, which are further divided
into strategic business units. Despite difficult economic conditions,
‘DuPont started its third century as one of twenty companies identi-
fied by BusinessWeek with the financial strength and flexibility to
take advantage of the acquisition opportunities available during
the bear market.

Financial strength is important to DuPont to fund the firm’s
oft-stated strategic intent of sustainable growth. DuPont divests
product lines that are not positioned to grow, even when perform-
ance has been strong. To fuel growth, DuPont purchases smaller
companies with unique technology and market know-how.

IT at DuPont is charged with enabling a vision for “One Du-
Pont.” This vision brings together the enterprise's diverse expertise to
deliver innovative solutions to specific customer problems. “One
DuPont” will also provide a single face to global customers who do
business with multiple DuPont business units and product lines.

IT Governance Archetypes for Allocating Decision Rights Be

To address the information needs of its diverse business units,
DuPont has a global architecture defining points of intersection
among the businesses. A small set of “Big Rules” establishes the crit-
ical elements of the architecture.* For example, one Big Rule speci-
fies: “When creating enterprise communications and data sharing,
use chemical industry standards for sharing that data back and
forth.”*

To support the business vision and implement Big Rules, DuPont
created enterprisewide infrastructure services such as channel man-
agement, telecommunications, security, desktop, and global ap-
Plications services. Although corporate declared some application
standards, such as Lotus Notes for collaboration and SAP for finan-
cials, organizational units define most of their application needs.
Application needs may be defined at the regional, business unit, or
product line level

Most global infrastructure development at DuPont has been
funded centrally, but business units eventually pay for all such ser-
vices through chargeback processes. Business units make their own
Investment decisions to fund the significant variations in processes
such as R&D, manufacturing, and distribution, and supply chain
‘management.

DuPont's enterprisewide IT governance (mapped onto the Gov-
emance Assessment Matrix in figure 3-5 and listing the critical IT
mechanisms) reflects global market demands, the diversity of its
businesses, and its emphasis on growth. A Governance Arrange-
ments Matrix could also be drawn for each of DuPont's six growth,
platforms.

IT principles are focused on delivering the “One DuPont”
vision. The principles evolved from discussions between the senior ~
executive team and IT leaders. One regional C1O described his role
in defining strategy and principles as follows: “Many times I was
educating on the potential of IT to play a different strategic role.
And many times I was trying to take a piece of strategy and figure
out how can we actually develop that and put it on the ground ina
business process.”"®

Architecture decisions result largely from the efforts of a global
architecture team of forty IT professionals from all regions, business
units, and IT competency centers. This team designs the rules and

--- PAGE 47 ---
om BEE IES

How DuPont Governs IT

-_—
[Finput [oeckion’ Input [Decision mput [Oseiion| ireut Deciice| eet [ection
3| - z ~
8 cl ee

12 2050 NI tear Schoo! Coker arin Systrns Reese OSA Uneaten

policies embodied in the architecture and makes recommendations
to DuPont's IT Global Leadership Team (GI), consisting of ap-
proximately fifteen of the top IT leaders across the businesses and
regions. DuPont IT managers note that every IT leader must work
closely with business leaders and must represent the business units
as well as the enterprise in architecture decisions. This capability
for IT to represent the business stems {com the operational and
reporting roles of business unit IT leaders.

DuPont's IT leaders make infrastructure decisions offering shared
services to business units and forcing any business units that prefer

h owernanee Archetypes for Allocating Decision Rights 7

not to leverage the shared services to present an argument justify-
ing their uniqueness. Business units must pay for these services, 50
they want to negotiate their needs with the central infrastructure
team. Aswith architecture, most of these negotiations occur between
local and corporate IT staff, who must represent business needs.
‘Thus, like architecture, DuPont governs infrastructure through IT
monarchies for both decisions and input. Infrastructure within Du-
Pont exists at several levels. In addition to the enterprisewide infra-
structure considered here, the strategic business units develop their
own infrastructure with their own governance arrangements. The
firmwide architecture governance ensures compatibility among the
multiple levels.

Because business application needs vary significantly actoss
business units, most of the decisions on business applications—as
well as the responsibility for implementation—lie within business
units. DuPont corporate mandates some vendor packages, but busi
ness units have discretion in the implementation. Thus, the feudal
approach best describes business application decision making at
DuPont. The enterprisewide applications defined by corporate busi-
ness and IT management influence these decisions, however, mak-
ing the input process primarily a duopoly.

Finally, If investment decisions result from negotiations be-
tween corporate and business unit executives. These negotiations
Involve IT executives as well as business executives, but the ine
volvement of both corporate and business unit leaders makes
investment decision making a federal process. Business units and
corporate also provide input to the investment process, making the
input, like the decision, federal

In summary, DuPont's global scale, growth targets, complex
structure, and “One DuPont” strategy have led to feudal deci-
sions on application needs balanced by a federal investment ap-
Proach. Because of its size and global diversity, Dupont relies
more than other companies in the study on IT professionals to
represent business needs. DuPont still values alignment between
IT and business strategy, but it relies more heavily than other
enterprises on IT professionals to define solutions for business
opportunities.

--- PAGE 48 ---
76 IT GOVERNANCE

Case Study: DBS Bank

DBS Bank is Singapore's leading bank, serving over 4 million cus~
tomers in Singapore, Thailand, Hong Kong, Indonesia, and the
Philippines." Like DuPont, DBS’s strategy focuses on growth,
joning the bank to become a leading Asian re-

specifically po:
gional franchise.

DBS intends to facilitate growth, in part, by rapidly shifting
acquired banks onto the DBS platform. Accordingly, DBS is build~
ing an enterprisewide platform with common technology, data def-
initions, and metrics. While accountability for performance will
remain at the local level, senior management mandates synergies
across the banks. Management's vision for the future is a “network
of relationships” rather than bricks and mortar. The enterprise plat-
form Is central to enabling the banks to provide a consistent set of
DBS services according to local needs.

TT efforts at DBS are guided by a set of principles encompassing
governance, data ownership, and architecture, DBS’s new architec-
ture defines fifteen Infrastructure services to be provided enter-
prisewide. An exception process enables development teams to
occasionally yo outside architecture standards, although the archi-
tecture is expected to then incorporate the new requirements. De-
velopment teams are centralized and work with architecture “case
workers’ to ensure an architecturally sound approach to all applica-
tion development.

IT investment falls into three investment tiers—the same way
DBS handles all capital investments, Business unit heads have
authority for investments under Singapore $1 million. Regional
project councils, comprising key IT and business managers, review
projects in the $ $1 million to $ $5 million range. The corporate
office handles all projects over $ $5 million, although all l-related
investment decisions are made on the recommendation of the
group CIO. Every major initiative is assessed on both financial and
nonfinancial objectives. IT governance at DBS Bank is mapped
onto the Governance Assessment Matrix in figure 3-6.

Despite sharing a vision of growth, DBS and DuPont take quite
different approaches to IT governance. Much of this disparity prob-
ably relates o industry differences in how fiems grow. DuPont in-

IV Governance Archetypes for Allocating Decision Rights 7

FIGURE 9-6

How DBS Bank Governs IT

DECISION

(oe | irctctre  Anpteaton |
Princioies | Architecture | “Strategies Needs "| Investment
|

eines oe noe fret
bosentan | fon

i

[anes poses acre ness roma om ‘Gereertent a

Creurepor Sains rein weacrane Iieador If maceshp pop
er Pret comet Regore repel cunts

28 Gama and Su Sebo ef tate Sts Pesoeh Hats)
Garter Eecuve Pays IAP esearch psiten “checoo I” Goverraren” Matane cao! wd
Pete Wm, Say 200. and ot porion

novates and acquires new businesses along business unit lines.
Needing to support the individual growth of its strategic business
units leads DuPont to a feudal business application governance
model and a duopoly for principles that leverage and guide IT
behaviors. DuPont uses a federal model for investment, however, to
ensure that both enterprisewide and business unit objectives
receive IT support. In contrast, DBS grows by replicating standard
business components, so strategic business decisions are centralized

\
i

--- PAGE 49 ---
8 IT GOVERNANCE

in the business monarchy while technical decisions are centralized
fin IT. As a result, DBS can grow rapidly in the region while also
competing as a low-cost provider of services.

Case Study: Motorola

‘Motorola offers an example of a company pursuing growth while
‘managing the inherent security issues."* Motorola is a global leader
in providing integrated communications and embedded electronic
solutions. Celebrating its seventy-fifth birthday in 2003, Motorola
consists of six sectors covering telecommunications equipment,
software solutions, and services, as well as semiconductor products
and integrated systems. Motorola is rebounding from very difficult
market conditions over the last couple of years, following the ex-
traordinary telecom and dot-com boom in the latel990s. With.
2002 sales of $27.3 billion, Motorola is attempting to return to
what the CKO refers to as steady, rational growth with “real prod-
ucts serving real needs in real marketplaces.”** Motorola is number
‘one or two in its key markets, and management believes the firm is
poised for growth as the global economy recovers. Growth for Mo-
torola will result from leveraging strong customer relationships and
from continued innovation in software applications and products.

Because the software and telecommunications industries are
particularly vulnerable to security risks, Motorola management be-
ieves that information security is critical to its growth objectives.
Management defines information security as protecting informa-
tion and systems from failures of availability, confidentiality, and
integrity. Motorola has committed to information security in both
its operations and its products. This commitment has made infor-
mation security a senior management issue and an integral part of
IY governance at Motorola.

IT governance at Motorola relies on close IT-business relation-
ships at both the corporate and sector level. The CIO is on the exec
utive team and participates in decisions on principles and invest-
ment with the Management Board. ‘The Cl0’s leadership team
consists of the heads of architecture, infrastructure, enterprise ap-
plications, and security and the CIOs of the six sectors. The CIO's

IT Governance Archetypes for Allocating Decision Rights 79

leadership team is responsible for both architecture and infrastruc-
ture decisions. Business application decisions involve negotiations
between corporate IT leaders, sector IT leaders, and business unit
heads in a duopoly arrangement. Motorola's IT governance ar-
rangements are shown in figure 3-7.

Motorola’s Corporate Information Security Officer, who reports
to the ClO, joins the CIO at quarterly Management Board mect-
ings. In these meetings, the security officer details Motorola's secu-
rity risks and alternatives for addressing them. A key element of
information security governance is ongoing education. The secu-
rity officer has worked with senior management on how to think

Floune 3-7

How Motorola Governs IT

a
@ ean 7 Business 7
a en a
‘apa [Decision] Wwavt |Oeckion input |teowon’ input ]Decinion] eession,
: | |
i= |
2. fuer
| “4 on
(incon ate
Ei in prerenoer

(© 20:5 RAT Stan Sct Canter for bore yates ace EI, Ua th persion.

--- PAGE 50 ---
80 IT GOVERNANCE

about both the likelihood of various security breaches and the
impacts of each threat on the business.
establishes security principles and defines priorities. The Board spec-
ifies the security budget separately from the rest of the IT bud-
gct. Motorola implements its security plans at both a corporate
and a sector level, The security officer's staff designs and buts
appropriate technology. Security staff members also work with
architects at both the corporate and the sector levels to ensure
that security measures are seamlessly built into infrastructure and
an example of how enterprises govern to address strategic issues.
Motorola's security concems are reflected in its organizational
structure and roles, governance arrangements, and specific archi-
tecture processes. Many enterprises are concerned with security, but
Motorola has made it a strategic priority. Its governance arrange-
ments ensure that security considerations are built into desirable
vee thie cases also illustrate how different sets of If mecha-
nisms can be used to effectively implement governance. The
Governance Arrangements Matrix for each firm identifies the
mechanisms through which the firm implements its governance
arrangements. For example, DuPont uses mechanisms like an archi-
tecture team of forty experts and global IT competency centers.
DBS's mechanisms include an office of architecture and regional
project councils. Motorola uses mechanisms including 2 manage-
ment board and security leaders. In the next chapter we examine
the mechanisms used to Implement IT governance and how they
work—both independently and together.

Industry and Regional Differences
in IT Governance

As the DuPont, DBS, and Motorola cases demonstrate, “typical”
profiles of IT governance do not serve as generic guidelines for gov-
emance. Many factors influence governance requirements. Indus-
try and region are two of the factors.

|
|
|

IT Governance Atchetypes for Allocating Decision Rights aL

To illustrate some of the industry differences, compare the for-
Profit with the not-for-profit and government sectors. Measuring
performance is challenging and much less clear in the government
and not-for-profit sectors. This difference affects the organization's
culture and each individual's sense of accountability as everyone
Works to provide service that is justified on legislative or social mer-
its and affordability rather than impact on future sales or profits.
the differences in governance between the for-profit and the gov
emment and not-for-profit sectors reflect these differences in cul-
ture, measurements, and accountabilities. For example, the not-for-
profit and government sectors use significantly more business
monarchies for IT principles and IT investment decisions than do
for-profit enterprises. The heavier use of business monarchies re-
fects the more centralized decision-making process in some types
of government and not-for-profit enterprises, such as emergency re-
sponse, taxation, and defense. The multiple and often conflicting
objectives of not-for-profits demand strong direction from the cen.
ter. The decision-making power of the CxOs might also result from
different attitudes toward risk management and empowerment.
Government and not-for-profit enterprises also rely more heavily
on federal models for business application needs decisions. Federal
models for business applications allow the central leadership to
ensure that the enterprise's objectives are considered, while recog:
nizing that functional units have unique IT requirements for ful-
filling their respective objectives. Chapter 7 extends the discussion
of how government and not-for-profit enterprises apply gover-
nance to meet their strategic objectives

Other industry differences are also apparent, For example,
financial services firms rely more on duopolies and, to a lesser ex.
tent, IT monarchies for decisions on IT principles than does the
“typical” enterprise. The heavy involvement of IT professionals in
Principles decisions probably results from the nature of the prod-
uct. In financial services, information is the product. Thus, IT has
historically played a strategic role in financial services enterprises.
The financial services industry also distinguishes itself from the
“typical” enterprise by its significantly lower reliance on federal
governance for IT decisions. ‘The federal model is heavily used for
input on IT decisions at financial services firms so that both shared

--- PAGE 51 ---
82 It GOVERNANCE

functions and individual business units influence decision making,
But federal decision-making approaches are rare, probably because
many full-service firms are organized around individual product
lines. Financial services firms have a significantly higher use of feu-
Gal approaches to business application needs decisions than do
“typical” enterprises. The feudal approach may be a historical arti-
fact from the product line focus that, until recently, was common
in the financial services industry.

Governance arfangements for the telecommunications and
Utility industries are similar to the arrangements in government
and not-for-profit enterprises. The telecommunications and utility
industries use business monarchies more than is “typical” for IT
principles and IT investment decisions. Use of federal decision
making for business application needs is considerably higher in the
telco and utility industries than in any other industry.

Manufacturing firms, in contrast, rely more on duopolies for
business application needs, probably because business applications
in these industries require an increasingly seamless supply chain. IT
involvement in business applications can clarify the capabilities
and limitations of the existing infrastructure and build new infra-
structure to support new applications. Manufacturing firms rely
more than other industries on a federal approach to IT investment
decisions, This governance probably reflects the unique needs of
different product lines, functional departments, and regional offices,
while simultaneously ensuring the robustness of the central supply
chain and the ability to address the needs of large, geographical
dispersed global customers.

We found that regional differences were not as pronounced as
industry differences, probably because many of the firms in the
sample were global firms, which diminishes the presence of re-
gional differences. European firms tended to rely more heavily on
business monarchies for principles, perhaps reflecting the need to
clarify how IT would enable coordination across business units. The
twenty-seven Asia-Pacific firms in the study demonstrated a greater
propensity to adopt federal governance patterns and lower use of IT
‘monarchies. American firms had a stronger business unit influence,
particularly in business application needs

IT Governance Archetypes for Allocating Decision Rights 33

Making Sense of “Typical”
IT Governance Design Profiles

Comparisons are a starting point to IT governance design. To com-
mence the process of assessing governance design, we have found
that the most useful approach to using our results is to ask the
question: Can you explain the difference between your enterprise’s
governance and the most common approach? You might also want
to compare your governance design to the most common approach
in your industry or region. Convincingly describing the difference
is an indicator of good harmony between your governance and
your strategy. An inability to describe the difference indicates a
need to rethink governance design in your enterprise

--- PAGE 52 ---
Mechanisms for
Implementing
IT Governance

ONE OF OUR MENTORS often said that there are two things
you really don’t want to watch being made—sausages and laws. In
both cases, a neatly packaged outcome results from messy pro-
cesses. Similarly, IT governance can be messy. Governance fosters
debate, negotiation, constructive disagreement, mutual education,
and often frustration. The process is messy, but good governance
arrangements enable individuals representing an enterprise’s con-
Aicting goals to reconcile their views to the enterprise's benefit.

Enterprises implement their governance arrangements through
a set of governance mechanisms—structures, processes, and commiu-
nications, Well-designed, well-understood, and transparent mech-
anisms promote desirable IT behaviors, Conversely, if mechanisms
are poorly implemented, then governance arrangements will fail to
yield the desired results. Chapter 3 showed how DuPont, DBS, and
Motorola implemented their archetypes for cach decision (see fig-
ures 3-5, 3-6, and 3-7). This chapter covers common governance
mechanisms and how they implement the different archetypes. We
provide detailed examples of these mechanisms and finish with a
case study of Carlson Companies as an example of how enterprises
assemble a coherent set of mechanisms. We close the chapter with
a short list of principles for designing governance mechanisms.

85

--- PAGE 53 ---
86 IT GOVERNANCE

Figure 4-1 lists fifteen of the most common IT governance
mechanisms, Effective governance deploys three different types
of mechanisms

+ Decision-making structures: Organizational units and roles
tesponsible for making IT decisions, such as committees,
‘executive teams, and business/IT relationship managers

© Alignment processes: Formal processes for ensuring that daily
behaviors are consistent with IT policies and provide input
ack to decisions. These include IT investment proposal
and evaluation processes, architecture exception processes,
service-level agreements, chargeback, and metrics.

© Communication approaches: Announcements, advocates,
channels, and education efforts that disseminate IT gover-
nance principles and policies and outcomes of IT decision-
making processes.

We will discuss each type of mechanism in this chapter and
explain the expected capabilities and limitations of each

Decision-Making Structures

The most visible Iv governance mechanisms are the organizational
structures that locate decision-making responsibilities according to
Intended archetypes. Ideally, every enterprise engages both IT and
‘business leaders in the governance process, Decision-making struc-
tures are the natural approach to generating commitment—albelt
some executives have been known to wiggle out of their IT gover-
nance responsibilities. To review design alternatives, we identify
the decision-making mechanisms most commonly deployed in
business monarchy, federal, IT’ monarchy, and duopoly archetypes.
Enterprises with effective governance mix and match decision-
making structures to implement predetermined archetypes and ul-
timately achieve organizational goals,

Business Monarchy Decision-Making Structures

IT can enable enterprise strategy only if senior management estab-
lishes strategic direction and elaborates an operating model. Enter-

“Mechanisms for Implementing IT Goremnance 87

Common Governance Mechanisms

coorankea
1 iotoce| 0
Decision-making Structures Sig ete)
: ae
ante crea margeart .
oot
1 mearstp commana oxvating as
nour | a a
Poet tans wan etine a
it
Boren Txteerto meas | wo
| co.nol comping Dusneas and " 4.
A executes all
sect conn 3
|
Alionment Process0s ian
Toi Ao oe
088 commune Lal
f mrt
seoscnttaguent | a
Fematy red omental 2»
i
Cerone enanpers a
Communication Approaches: } | |
| 0 a
sence agmetvcurcanc | 2
once aoe tose fuse al oh 7
‘Wieb-tared portals and irererets u
errr i | ee

016 2% a a 8 60 70 BF OO Im
Percent of Participants Using

Reseach conducted at 258 enlorpses in wont: thoy counts

{82008 Sen Shel Gena fr infornaton Syston Paseo (ISA. Usd wit comin

prises adopt a number of approaches to eliciting this direction.
Business monarchies—usually in the form of executive commit.
tees—often play a role. Enterprises vary considerably in the design
of their executive committees,

In some enterprises the CEO works with a small team of Lop
executives to ensure that IT aligns with corporate objectives. At

—

--- PAGE 54 ---
88

GOVERNANCE

DBS Bank, for example, the Corporate Office, which consists of the
chairman and CEO, the vice chairman, and the chairman of DBS
Hong Kong, ratifies principles and handles [T-related investment
decisions greater than $ $5 million. (See the DBS case in Chapter
3.) The CEO's visibility in IT decisions at DBS matters because the
firm takes a “directed” approach to IT management. DBS does not
rely on consensus. The CEO expects the CIO to make and deliver
key decisions on corporate objectives. The CEO's direct involve.
ment in setting direction thus strengthens the position of the CIO.
Other enterprises focus the attention of a subset of the senior
management team on IT issues, For example, at ING, the Dutch
financial conglomerate, three members of the Executive Board sit
on the II’ Policy Board (IPB), ‘The IPB develops steategy, approves
technical standards, and sets priorities for group projects. The ITPR
also has a role in ensuring systems security, appointing senior IT
management, and approving policies in areas such as enterprise
applications, infrastructure, and architecture, By having three Exec-
Uutive Board members play such an active role in If governance and
management, ING ensures both that IT fulfills corporate objectives
and that Executive Board actions are informed by IT capabilities.
The level of senior executive involvement in IT governance
evolves as enterprises hecome more savvy in using I strategically.
At Dow Coming, « silicon manufacturer, the senior executive team,
determined the need to transtorm I {rom back-oflice function to
strategic enabler in the mid-1990s.! For several years, the executive
committee met regularly to redefine the role of 11, articulate the role
of the CIO, establish architectural principles, outline key projects—
particularly the implementation of an enterprise system—and
closely manage IT investment priorities. The full executive commit
tee entrenched IT as a key function with a capable leader and devel-
oped both confidence in the CIO and competence in articulating
how IT should enable business, Ongoing IT governance responsibil-
ities were then vested in a subset of executive committee members.
Similarly, UPS relied on a seven-member senior management
‘team to direct funding and to shape the role of IT in the late 1980s,
Once UPS had built up its [capability in the mid-1990s, the senior
management team was reduced to four members, By reducing the
number of seniot managers on the steering committee, UPS re-

‘Mechanisms for Implementing TP Governance 89

leased some management resources and attention for other strate-
sic needs, Reducing the sizeof the steering committee was recog.
tion that UPS had created sustainable seniot management awareness
Of the importance of IT, Senior management had incorporated
IT issues into a more holistic view of strutegy at UPS. The smaller
steering committee could represent the senior management team
and share learning about IV with other senior managers.

For enterprises like Dow Coming and UPS, including the CIO
as a member of the executive team enhanced the ability of a busi-
"ess monarchy to understand the role of IP in business strategy and
to map the IT governance role of the executive team, Making the
C10 w member of both the business monarchy and the IT’ moar.
chy provides a natural linkage between business and {T strategy, Kor
large, complex enterprises, however, embellishing the CIO role
does not address the difficult issues assoctated with bakineing the
different needs of diverse business units. Large enterprises often im.
plement federal arrangements

Federal Decision-Making Structures

Almost 90 percent of enterprises in our study indicated that a
senior executive committee played a role in IT governance, Where
these senior executive teams drew members from all business units,
they Implemented a federal rather than. business monarchy anche.
type, Because federal steuctures overtly work to balance enterprise
and business unit priorities, they can provide valuable input to I
governance decisions,

The desire for shared data and IT infrastructures is at the heart of
most federal TT organization designs, Mechanisms implementing
federal IT governance protect business unit autonomy while devel.
oping the standards needed for integrated business capabilities, Man
agement at Brady Corporation, a $500 million manufacturer of iden
tification products, decided in the mid-1990s that success meant that
business units would cease competing with one another and start
cooperating. Management believed that IT would be instrumental
in enabling the change. So Brady created an IT Steering Team cone
sisting of the heads of its three business groups, key business unit
leaders, the CFO, and the C10, This team takes responsibility for

--- PAGE 55 ---
90 EY GOVERNANCE

principles and investment decisions, Engaging business unit leaders
in these discussions has facilitated development of—and commi
ment to—shared infrastructure and common data definitions

Similarly, Old Mutual South Africa, a financial services firm
with insurance, asset management, and banking operations, aims
to operate as one system but with business unit accountability
OMSA\s Strategic Investment Committee (SICOM) is chaired by the
CEO and includes the CFO, CIO, and three business heads. SICOM
makes IT’ investment decisions and tracks their results—just as it
clogs all other investments at OMSA. The advantage of making I
investment decisions at this level is that the decision makers’ com-
bined expertise provides a holistic view of the enterprise. ‘The com-
millce is very aware of the uadeoffs among their investment
choices. Thus, they are more likely to target investments strategi-
cally than to fritter away investment dollars on “nice-to-have”
rather than “must have" business solutions.

While the importance of the involvement of business execu-
tives in I governance is well established, many senior executives
acknowledge that they didn’t get involvement right the first me
they tried. The wrong people were on the committee or committee
members didn’t always attend meetings, or members didn’t under-
stand their responsibilities, More than a few executives consider IT
decisions of any kind to be tiresome, But persistence pays. Deter-
mined executives eventually learn how to create new business
value and own I through their work on executive committees.
And once they understand the value these committees can drive,
the work becomes downright compelling,

IT Monarchy Decision-Making Structures

Complementing business monarchies, IT monarchies make most of
the world’s IT architecture and infrastructure decisions. We will
describe the two most common implementations of IT monarchies:
1T leadership tewms and IT architecture committees.

IT Leadership Teams

In most cases, the I’ monarchy is represented, at least in part,
by IT leadership teams, Leadership teams may comprise IT func
tional heads (operations, architecture, applications, and so on), they

Mechanisms for Tnplementing If Governance OL

may be CIOs of business units, or they may be a combination of the
two, In many financial services firms, IT leadership teams comprise
the IT vice presidents from all the business units and functions
(often numbering forty or more). These teams often make infra-
structure and architectural decisions.

In many enterprises, business unit ClOs make up a decision-
making body. At Old Mutual South Africa, business unit CIOs, who
report to the CIO, are decision makers in all key IT decisions except
investment decisions. The business unit CIOs approve the recom-
mendations of specialized IT committees on architecture and infra-
structure and establish firmwide IT policies, The business unit ClOs
identify and address thorny business unit-enterprise tradeoffs,

One of the most difficult challenges facing leadership teams is
resolving the different needs of business units that vary markedly
in size and thus power, IT leadership teams in firms with business
Unils of vastly different sizes do not give equal weight to the votes
of their members, As one C1O noted, “This is not @ democracy.”
‘Typically, the enterprise would beneft by focusing more resources
‘on and shaping policies around the needs of dominant business
units; but such enterprisewide decisions may disenfranchise small
business units

‘More than 85 percent of enterprises have formal IT leadership
teams. In our study, enterprises with an IT leadership team had
more effective governance performance than enterprises without
such a mechanism. As long as these teams comprise competent,
high-level individuals motivated to meet business needs, they can
make invaluable contributions to enterprise success

Architecture Committees

A second type of IT decision-making structure is the architee-
ture committee. Usually made up of technical experts, IT archi-
tecture committees ate responsible for defining standards and, in
some cases, granting exceptions. In most cases, the role of the
architecture committee is to advise the IT leadership team on archi-
tectural issues, but occasionally the architecture committee is a key
governance decision-making body.

ACCampbell Soup, the IT leadership team establishes mandates
for Campbell's Architecture’ Review Board, which has representa-
lives [rom the business units and the corporate architecture team.s

--- PAGE 56 ---
92 IT GOVERNANCE

The Architecture Review Board prepares a three-year architectural
blueprint for the company and monitors technology standards,
classifying the status of relevant technologies as research, invest,
maintain, or sunset. The Architecture Review Board works with the
firm's project management, program review, and compliance teams
to ensure that projects conform to architectural standards and meet
business objectives. A key concem of the Architecture Review Board
is ensuring that Campbell’s IT environment evolves consistently
with business goals. IT architectures are not static. Aging standards
are retired slowly. New standards arrive with new or upgraded ap-
plications. The Architecture Review Board sets a technology di-
rection for the firm and monitors implementations to keep the firm
on course.

Approximately 85 percent of ClOs in our study reported having
an architecture committee. At many enterprises, architecture com.
mittees get off to a rocky start, usually because the committees are
formed to “impose” technology standards on the enterprise. Be-
cause standards limit autonomy, developers and their business
Partners tend to resist. As long as senior management espouses the
standardization for business reasons, however, standards gradually
gain acceptance. Application development and business unit man-
agers come to appreciate the simplification and reliability of the
standardized technology environment. The growing acceptance
allows architecture committees to more effectively define an enter-
Prise architecture and facilitate its implementation.

When architecture committees work closely with business unit
managers, they are not only effective in introducing technology
standards; they anticipate requirements for new technologies with
valuable capabilities. To have impact, architecture committees
‘must work intensely with both business unit leaders and applica-
tion developers, educating them on the benefits of architecture and
becoming increasingly familiar with their needs. Like IT leadership
teams, IT architecture committees can make a significant contribu.
tion to enterprise objectives. Badly designed and implemented,
however, they create obstacles to enterprise success

Coordinating Business and IT Monarchies

I monarchies are a natural and valuable approach to applying
the enterprise's IT expertise. But the risk of IT monarchies is that, in

‘Mechanisms for implementing IT Governance 93.

coordinating IT efforts, they can become isolated from organiza-
Uonal reality. Enterprises waste considerable resources making tech-
nical improvements that no one converts into business value.
Overlapping membership in IT leadership teams and senior execu-
tive teams, often in the person of the CIO, can align the activities
of IT and business monarchies. Business unit CIOs are a second
popular link for maintaining connections between IT monarchies
and business leaders. In many cases, business unit ClOs sit on both.
the IT leadership team and the management team of their business
units. The effect of these IT monarchies is then similar to a federal
arrangement, though it is simpler to implement.

Duopoly Decision-Making Structures

The typical role of business leaders in IT governance is to clarify
business objectives and incorporate IT capabilities into strategy
formulation. The typical role of IT leaders is to help envision IT-
enabled strategies, clarify architectural standards, and design shared
infrastructures. The responsibilities of these two groups are obvi-
ously intertwined. Formal governance linkages often result in bet-
ter performance, as we will see in the next chapter.

Linkages are sometimes accomplished through overlapping
memberships on IT and business monarchy mechanisms, as de-
scribed in the previous section. Alternatively, some enterprises es-
tablish duopoly governance arrangements that comprise joint IT
and business members. Over 70 percent of the enterprises in our
study had IT councils with joint business/fT membership. Around
85 percent of enterprises had process teams with IT’ members, and a
similar percentage had business/IT relationship managers. These
three mechanisms support duopoly archetypes.

IT Councils with Joint Business/IT Membership

One approach to ensuring business/IT interactions is through a
joint decision council. For example, at Abbey National, the United
Kingdoms sixth largest banking group, the IM leadership group
includes representatives from both IT and business. In addition,
many of the group’s members have both IT and business responsi-
bilities. The firm's IT director, for example, also has responsibility
for business functions such as debt management and procurement,

--- PAGE 57 ---
94 IT GOVERNANCE

‘The mix of business unit and IT skills represented in both individ-
ual skill sets and the membership of the committee enables the
team to align business strategy and IT in making architecture, infra-
structure, and business application decisions. The team’s composi-
tion also helps identify and resolve the very different IT require-
ments for businesses ranging from the firm’s large U.K. personal
financial services business to its smaller wholesale banking arm.

Process Organizations

Increasing emphasis on cross-functional business process has
Jed many enterprises to focus on process governance mechanisms.
‘The marriage of process and IT is a natural in most enterprises
because cross-functional business processes depend on information
flows that cross organizational boundaries and are supported by the
If infrastructure. We found process councils—made up of process
owners—working with IT executives to make business application
decisions at organizations like DBS and ING. Process councils also
have input into other IT decisions because they drive infrastructure
needs at the enterprise level

Much of the emphasis on business process is reflected in or-
ganizational units structured around projects. Project-oriented orga-
izational designs facilitate management of cross-functional, multi-
business unit processes and redirect management focus from business
unit to enterprise objectives. These designs also position an enter-
prise for the organizational change requirements of IT projects.

‘As an example, MeadWestvaco has as many as 275 projects
running simultaneously, and most have an IT component. Mead-
Westvaco designed its IT Stewardship Model to organize IT gover-
hance around projects (figure 4-2), Following up on its enterprise
resource planning (ERP) implementation, the firm is creating per-
formance teams for each of its core processes. Process owners head
Lup the performance teams. The process owners assign project teams
drawn from multiple functional areas to staff process improvement
initiatives, Project team members retain their functional responsi-
bilities in MeadWestvaco, but they are accountable (responsible to
each other) for the success of their project. Project teams closely
monitor their projects, coding them red, yellow, or green to indi-
cate their status. Projects are red when something goes wrong so

‘Mechanisms for Implementing IT Governance 95

FIGURE 4-2

IT Stewardship Model and Roles at MeadWestvaco

(Emerprise
| ‘solutions (EIS) _ erection
\. Steering Committee + ve

_/ Business
‘performance teams

+ Chaledby business fader!
process owners

«Brive business perornanca
Srorovement staves ae
projects

+ Standards aore-ence

Source: Muadestoco caput cons Used wh permission

that team members address the problem and senior management
can investigate. When a project turns yellow, it gets attention so
that it doesn’t turn red. Everybody on the team is responsible for
noting when something goes wrong and then changing the project
code from green to yellow.

This closely monitored project arrangement operates in parallel
with MeadWestvaco’s IT Council. The ff Council is chaired by the
corporate C1O, and its members have high-level IT responsibility
within business units (such as business unit C10 or CFO). The Coun
cil makes standards decisions and approves infrastructure changes,
to address the needs of the business performance teams. The Coun-
cil also works with the Enterprise Information Solutions (EIS) Steer-
ing Committee, which sets overall strategic direction. Comprising
executive vice presidents, the senior vice president of research and
technology, the CFO, the CIO, and one division president, the EIS

--- PAGE 58 ---
98 IT GOVERNANCE

Steering Committee approves major IT investments. By designing
governance to engage both business and IY’ leaders in its decision-
making structures, MeadWestvaco has transcended formal organi-
zational boundaries in pursuing process improvement and leverag-
ing its ERP, Decision-making structures teaming up IT and business
decision makers for process governance, particularly around proj-
ects, offer a particularly tangible opportunity to focus IT and busi-
ness executives on strategic objectives

Business/tl Relationship Managers

Local business units and functions can find centrally coordi-
nated mandates onerous or confusing. Business/I1 relationship
managers play an important role in communicating mandates ancl
their implications and supporting the needs of business unit man-
ayers while helping them see benefits rather than inconveniences,
Lifective relationship managers must be true hybrids—equally com:
fortable discussing business issues, such as effective market segmen-
tation, and technical issues, such as the best cesign of a distributed
database to collect customer segment information, When they suc-
ceed, relationship managers make any governance archetype more
elfective,

Commonwealth Bank of Australia (CBA) retained internal re=
lationship managers when it outsourced its IT services. These man-
agers facilitate the relationship between the business and the con-
tractors to help the business units articulate business needs,
ize value, and minimize the cost of IT to their units. CBA has
found that the key to successful relationship management is to
have high-level IT managers who can gain the respect of senior
business unit managers,

The ‘Tennessee Valley Authority's IT unit assigns account man-
agers to support business units, acting as their advocate in discus-
sions with corporate TT. ‘The account managers facilitate IT gover-
nance processes by ensuring that IT standards and the related buy
list are understood and followed. Simultaneously, account man-
agers communicate business issues to their IT coworkers, Account
managers facilitate the exception process and assist in advancing
business cases through the approval process, As a result, the effec-
tiveness of the account managers depends a great deal on their abil-
ity to make the infrastructure responsive to business unit needs,”

maxi

‘Mechanisms for Implementing IF Gavernance oF

In firms like DuPont, Campbell Soup, and Mattiott, business
unit CIOs play the role of relationship manager, They meet with
corporate IT andl with business unit heads to negotiate IT principles,
architecture, and investment decisions. The orginizational status
‘of business unit CIOs empowers them to make decisions binding
both business units and the enterprise.

uopolies are particularly effective for enterprises experiencing
problems aligning business and TT. In duopolies, business and 11°
interests are connected via joint decision making but still focused
on meeting the single business unit's needs, This connection and
focus increase the likelihood that IT will be strategically aligned
and business executives will understand their role in generating.
value from TT. Duopoly decision-making mechanisms, however,
often require large memberships with unique capabilities, Duopo-
lies also typically rely on the central IP group to implement firm-
wide initiatives such as shared services or common plattorms for
business processes. The key to effective duopolies is to find a mix of
senior leaders representing both business ancl IT with the status to
enlist the entire enterprise in TT-enabled initiatives while recogniz~
ing the needs of each business unit

Alignment Processes

Decision-making structures are the first step in designing IT gover
nance, Bul effective governance is as much actions as decisions.
Alignment processes are IT management techniques for securing
widespread involvement in the effective management and use of
11, Alignment processes should bring everybody on board both by
providing input into governance decisions and by disseminating
the outputs of IT decisions. Key alignment processes include the IT
investment approval process, the architecture exception process,
service-level agreements, chargeback, project tacking, and formal
tracking of business value from

IT Investment Approval Process

‘The objective of the IT investment approval process is to ensure
that IT investments generate significant returns to the enterprise rel-
ative to alternative investment opportunities, Most enterprises for
malize their I investment proposal process to ensure that creative

--- PAGE 59 ---
98 IT GOVERNANCE

ideas and strategic priorities are considered by investment decision
makers. Many enterprises use standardized IT investment approval
application templates to estimate metrics such as ROI, NPV, and
risk for each project. Without investment templates, decision mak-
ers struggle to compare projects and can miss opportunities for
value from investments with less certain benefits.

While standardized project proposals expose the relative bene-
fits and risks of individual projects, they are less effective in estab-
lishing how a proposed project contributes to an enterprise's strate-
gic objectives. Most enterprises rely on business units and functions
to establish their priorities based on business unit and function ob-
jectives. Investment committees typically determine the set of proj-
ects that together provide the greatest strategic benefits to the
enterprise.

UPS focuses on strategic priorities by organizing the investment
process around its core processes. IT investment proposals emanate
from the firm's four cross-functional process teams. The process
teams submit formal project charters to the IT Steering Committee.
Because the processes are cross functional, the charters transcend
organizational boundaries. The processes embody the firm's strate-
gic priorities, making it easier for the IT steering committee to
assess the strategic impact of IT investment opportunities.

USAA relies on its Integration Steering Committee to assess
strategic priorities of all [T and non-IT projects.* This nine-member
committee has senior-level representatives from major business
units and functions including IT. Headed by an executive officer of
Enterprise Business Operations, who is a direct report to the CEO,
the committee considers factors such as shared requirements across
proposals, potential value to the firm, the availability of needed
infrastructure, and the readiness of the organization to effectively
implement the project. The charter of the Integration Steering
‘Committee is to implement the firm’s operating model—a model
based on a single view of the customer. Because the operating
model demands integration across business units, a growing per-
centage of USAA's investment dollars are funding enterprise proj-
ects such as customer relationship management, e-commerce appli-
cations, workflow management, and employee intranet. But at
USAA, even business unit-specific projects must pass the test of
strategic importance to the enterprise.

Mecianisins for Implementing IT Governance 99

Without an effective IT investment approval process, IT invest-
ments invariably build toward localized rather than enterprise
goals. In doing so, project proposals often overestimate benefits be-
cause they fail to consider the combined impact of the full set of an
enterprise's projects. One investment committee reviewed a set of IT
project proposals that, according to their estimated benefits, could
have combined to reduce the firm’s headcount by over 100 percent!
‘The IT investment approval process is a critical determinant as to
whether IT isa strategic enabler or simply a huge expense,

Architectural Exception Process

Few enterprises can afford to support every technical platform
that the business might find useful. Technology standards are criti-
cal to [T—and business—efficiency. But occasional exceptions are
not only appropriate; they are necessary. The question is how you
can identify the occasional exception. The answer is the architec-
tural exception process.

Exceptions are how enterprises learn, Enterprises use the excep-
tion process to meet unique business needs and to gauge when
existing standards are becoming obsolete. Exceptions act as a re-
lease valve for reducing organizational pressures. We are often im-
pressed by the passion with which managers advocate their-excep-
tion positions. Without a viable exception process, business urits
ignore the enterprisewide standards and implement exceptions
with no approval. This approach raises organizational tensions that
build over time as more unauthorized exceptions occur. Other busi-
ness unit managers who follow the rules get frustrated. We have
heard stories of heated debates and the occasional table thumping.
The result is typically more vigilant IT architecture enforcement
that we have heard described as “here come the IT police again.”
Worse still, the unauthorized exceptions rob the enterprise of the
‘opportunity to learn.

Architecture committees usually have responsibility for estab-
lishing standards. In many cases the architecture committee also
takes responsibility for granting exceptions to standards. These
committees, however, can easily become mired in insignificant bat-
tles, which create a bottleneck in IT implementations. To avoid this
dilemma, most architecture exception requests should be resolved
before they reach the architecture committee.

--- PAGE 60 ---
100. IY GOVERNANCE

The most successful exception processes resolve most issues at
the project team level, while quickly escalating any potentially
strategic exception requests, One approach is to put an IT architect,
on every project team. ‘The architects clarify standards and elimi-
nate minor debates. They can also help a project team make the
case for valuable exceptions,

In firms where standardization is a faitly comfortable ht—for
example, an enterprise emphasizing low-cost operations—excep-
tion requests are necessarily rare, Project architects understand the
expectation that systems implementations must conform to stan-
dards. CIOs at Air Products and MeadWestwaco note that, because
exceptions are rare, they can personally handle,the occasional re-
quest for an exception. Architecture committees need not become
involved.

In financial services, logistics, and other enterprises for which
IP is part of the product, exception requests are more frequent, If
the project architect senses the need for an exception, the case is
often referred to an architecture committee. Effective architecture
committees have a high threshold for the quality of the business
case that must accompany an exception request. his Uhreshold
helps reduce the number of exceptions to only those of particularly
great importance to project teams—and the enterprise,

At State Street Corporation, the local I manager or the project
maiager Working on the initiative has responsibility to justify an
exception to the standard and then bring it to the owner of the
standard and the enterprise Office of Architecture. The project
manager and the owner of the standard discuss the advantages and.
disadvantages of going “off standard." If the project manager
and the standard owner cannot agree on the exception, it is imme:
diately referred for arbitration to the C1O, COO, and business unit
leader, This appears to be a steep escalation process, but as the for-
mer CIO explains, there are some inherent advantages to this
approach. “It definitely sounds severe to immediately escalate to
this level but it's the easiest way of dealing with the responsiveness
issue, because if you do not respond quickly the business will be
concerned about the potential delay and may circumvent the pro-
cess altogether”

‘The effectiveness of the architecture exception process depends
on the ability of the IT unit to research and define standards and on

Mechanisms for Implementing I Govetnanice 101

the enterprise's commitment to technology standards, Where tech-
nology standardization is effectively implemented, a rapid excep-
tion escalation process reinforces the enterprise architecture and
helps the enterprise build an enabling IT capability,

Service-Level Agreements

Service-level agreements (SLAs), used by 90 percent of the en-
terprises in our study, list available services, alternative quality
levels, and related costs, Through negotiations between the I ser-
vices unit and business units, an SLA leads to articulation of the
services I offers and the costs of the services. These negotiations
Clarify the requirements of the business units, thereby informing
governance decisions on infrastructure, architecture, and business
application needs.

SLAs often encourage comparisons with extemal providers, ‘The
comparisons should result in either cost-effective intemal service
provisioning or a decision to outsource some infrastructure ser
vices—in either case a desirable outcome, Commonwealth Bank of
Australia, for example, estimates annual IT cost savings of about 20
percent as a result of repackaging and eventually outsourcing infra
structure services, S1.As also encourage business units to be consci-
entious in their [T requests, Guaranteed split-second response times
‘on Web transactions typically cost more than thtee-second re-
sponse times, Similarly, a thirty-minute guaranteed response time
to a workstation going down is costlier than a four-hour guaranteed
response time, A customer service representative in a call center can
justify the extra cost of a guaranteed thirty-minute response time
because of the potential for lost revenue. An administrative assis-
tant in the accounting office probably could not.

SLAs force I’ units to think like external providers. ‘They "sell"
their services and thus must constantly look for ways to save
money. The challenge of the SLA process is In translating business
service-level requirements into IT services. IT costs result from labor
and from processing time, storage capacity, and the like. Business
units require services such as processing of invoices, Web access,
and rapid response to online queries. Increasingly, I units are
‘translating their costs into charges business managers can under-
stand, An SLA listing IT costs in IT ferms will not help business
units make choices on IT service levels of use the services wisely

--- PAGE 61 ---
102 IT GOVERNANCE

Nor will it help IT service committees design shared services. The
SLA has value when communications about business needs and I
services facilitate decisions that lead to lower costs and better uti-
lization of IT resources.

SLAs should help IT and business managers make better
choices—choices about how to buy, sell, and price, Well-designed
SLAS encourage professionalism on both sides of the supply-
demand chain, ‘The result is better IT services and better under-
standing by both business and IT’ of the business value generated

Chargeback

Chargeback is an accounting mechanism for allocating central
1¥ costs to business units. At first glance, it does not seem related
to IT governance decisions. However, we found that some enter-
prises use chargeback successfully for aligning decisions on infra-
structure, business application needs, and IT investinent with busi-
ness objectives

‘The purpose of chargeback is to allocate costs so that business
unit IT costs reflect use of shared services while the shared services
Unit matches its costs with the businesses it supports. Chargeback
may work with SLAs as the charging mechanism for services de-
livered or it can be an alternative to SLA for IT services for which
there are no alternative service levels, Like SLAs, management
usually anticipates that chargeback will lead to effective use of
IT. Most managers reflect market-based behaviors in response to 11
chargeback, adjusting their demands according to the value they
receive and pushing back on IT unit charges when they seem out
of line,

‘The fixed nature of many IT costs—and the variable needs of
IP's intemal clients—complicate IT cost computations and obscure
some cost savings, AS a result, I’ charges often lead to internal, typ-
ically nonvalue-added debates. Instead of promoting informative
discussions about IT and business value or leading to more respon-
sible buyer and consumer behaviors, chargeback aften leads to un-
desirable outcomes—endless complaints, lack of trust, averting for-
mal approval processes, or not using shared services.

When IT understands its costs and charges out accordingly,
chargeback processes demonstrate the cost savings resulting from
shared services, Enterprises with effective costing mechanisms find

‘Mechanisms for implementing IT Governance 103

that chargeback can foster useful discussions between IT and busi-
ness units about IT charges." ‘These discussions lead to better-
informed fT governance decisions.

Project Tracking

A critical step in implementing (1’ governance is to develop the
discipline to track the progress of individual IT projects. Over 90
percent of enterprises in our study indicated that they are tracking
project resources consumed. Enterprises use @ variety of tools to
support project tracking, Dashboards—some like the red-yellow-
green system at MeadWestwaco, others more quantitative—highs
light when projects are off target, Dashboards alert management to
potential problems early and enable actions to forestall delays or
cost overruns.

At top-performing enterprises, tracking is just one element of a
standard project management methodology. Some enterprises rely
on the Capability Maturity Model, a highly standardized process
for certifying organizational project management." Other enter=
prises apply an internally developedt project management method=
ology. There is little evidence that ane type of metic or project
management methodology is more successful than another, but
any attempt to measure implementation milestones and to quickly
identify and address problems greatly enhances the likelihood of
implementation success,

Formal ‘racking of Business Value
Much of the challenge of effective If governance results trom
the difficulty of assessing the value of IT. IT decision makers make
more effective decisions as they better understand the value the
enterprise receives from IT, Formally tracking the business value of
If enhances organizational learning about the value of f-enabled

initiatives

Approximately 60 percent of respondents in our study indi-
cated that their enterprises formally tracked business value. Track-
ing includes determining whether expectations for a project’s cost
reductions or revenue increases actually materialized. One CTO
noted that the first time her firm conducted post-implementation
eviews they found that 0 percent of the firm's projects the prior
year had met objectives. In one year, the percentage of projects

--- PAGE 62 ---
loa IY GOVERNANCE

meeting business objectives increased to 40 percent—mostly the
result of focusing the attention of managers on expectations. ‘The
value-tracking process helps both business and IT executives to
Understand the sources of andl obstacles to generating value from IT
investments, With practice, it also leads to mote realistic estimates
of the proposed benefits of a system

Because project outcomes are difficult to isolate—particularly
when projects are part of larger program goals—increasing numbers
of enterprises are formalizing intermediate objectives. For example,
JPMorgan Chase tracks the number of projects introducing non-
standard technologies as an indicator of the viability of its
standard-setting process. Many 11° units track the cost of infrastruc.
ture services with a goul of constantly decreasing unit costs, These
intermediate objectives often apply six sigma or related quality
management techniques. ‘The additional metrics growing out of
intermediate objectives clarify management accountabilities and
provide another basis for assessing IT outcomes.

IT governance js about empowering all an enterprise's employ-
ccs. ‘The decision-making mechanisms focus on hammering out
business strategy and the implications for IT, Alignment processes
allow strategic decisions to guide daily actions. In addition, align
ment processes allow daily experiences with IT to feed back into
the strategy process. A third type of governance mechanism—com-
munication approaches—is essential to make governance arrange-
ments known,

Communications Approaches

Communication mechanisms are intended to “spread the word”
about IT governance decisions and processes and related desirable
behaviors throughout the enterprise, Firms communicate their
governance mechanisms in a variety of ways. We found that the
more management communicated formally about the existence of
IT governance mechanisms, how they worked, and what outcomes
were expected, the more effective was their governance.

Senior Management Announcements

Senior management announcements clarifying priorities and
demonstrating commitment usually get a great deal of attention

‘Meciianisns for Implementing FT Governasice 103

throughout an enterprise, Bighty-seven percent of responding en-
terprises indicated that they communicate governance through
senior management announcements. Many firms tested gover-
nance communications in the late 1990s as they put in enterprise-
wide systems or major new infrastracture platforms. Tor example,
Dow Corning announced that during its two-year ERP implementa-
tion process, no other IT implementations would be considered,
Similarly, management at Delta Air Lines committed to rebuilding.
infrastructure for airline operations and customer experience and
explicitly refused to consider other functions or processes. Com-
mitment to this kind of clarity about what will and will not be
done helps everyone in an enterprise focus their attention on
strategic objectives.

As IT becomes more strategic in enterprises, IT governance
stows more Important, Developing a communication strategy to
announce and explain new IT governance processes contributes
to achieving the objectives of the governance design. A number of
firms use rallying themes to keep everyone focused on theit gover-
nance objectives, Management at DBS has spread the gospel about
Asia, a program to create the infrastructure for the next genera-
tion of DBS services and products. Anchored by a technology foun-
dation, Asia21 incorporates new approaches to process innovation,
risk management, performance measures, people and organiza-
onal structures, and data management.

Many current IT initiatives intend to create more integrated
enterprises, Integrating formerly autonomous functions or business
units involves changes in not only IT but also business processes
and organizational culture, Well-cireulated, persistent themes like
“One State Street” prepare organizational members for the change.
Communicating governance processes facilitates the change and
provides a road map for what could otherwise be perceived as an.
idle threat or promise.

Formal Committees

Despite concerns about committee meetings demanding too
much time, much IT governance is committee work, Ideally, tt
governance requires few new committees; especially at the ex-
ccutive level, governance decisions can be folded into ongoing
responsibilities, Ad hoc committees, however, are often important

--- PAGE 63 ---
106 UT GOVERNANCE

mechanisms. The decision-making bodies described earlier in this
chapter are often committees. Committees also make lower-level
governance decisions and carry out high-level decisions. For exam-
ple, project work often relies on committees of stakeholders to de-
fine requirements, monitor progress, and identify potential issues.
As Chase Manhattan Bank (now JPMorgan Chase) implemented
e-business initiatives, the head of e-business met with stakeholders
of all initiatives for forty-five minutes each week." The participants
in the meetings discussed progress on the project and related
efforts, including infrastructure development and architectural
issues, These large gatherings led to greater understanding of the
governance decisions around enterprise architecture and shared
infrastructure, and their implications for individual business appli-
cation projects.

Committee meetings are important too because informal mech-
anisms such as water cooler discussions have proved to be sadly in-
effective, In our study, extensive use of informal communications
‘was the only communication approach not associated with high
governance effectiveness. Careful committee assignments are ce-
quired to involve executives in decisions important to them. Ele
tronic tools can overcome geographical barriers, making it possible
to staff committees that can make decisions, accept accountability,
and monitor implementation. Communications within and across
committees align the efforts of the committees with other gover-
nance initiatives.

Office of CIO or IT Governance

IT governance needs a recognized advocate, owner, and organi-
zational home. Eighty-six percent of participants in our study used
an office of IT governance or the office of the ClO to communicate
governance arrangements. IT governance needs an owner to ensure
that individual mechanisms reinforce rather than contradict one
another and to communicate governance processes and purposes.
Just as important, the person, team, or committee responsible for
IT governance needs to ensure alignment between IT governance
and the governance of the enterprise's other key assets (financial,
human, physical, [P, and relationship). The office of the CIO or the
office of IT governance are effective mechanisms for advocating

‘Mechanisms for Implementing IT Governance 107

and educating about IT governance. Who should own and thus be
held accountable for IT governance is an Important decision we
return to in chapter 8.

Working with Nonconformists

Rarely do all affected managers enthusiastically embrace IT gov-
emance decisions, When managers engage in behaviors that under-
mine enterprise architecture, disregard If investment guidelines,
duplicate shared infrastructure, or ignore project-tracking stan-
dards, they may be demonstrating lack of awareness of governance
decisions or an unwillingness to adopt mandated practices, Work-
ing with managers who stray from desirable behaviors is a neces-
sary part of generating the potential value of governance processes.

Fighty-four percent of the respondents in our study respond to
nonconforming behavior by visiting with offending managers to ex-
plain the rationale for IT governance. ‘the visits usually establish
whether managers are ignoring governance arrangements because
they do not know them or because they do not agree with them
Then a dialogue can commence to educate, address concerns, make
exceptions, or even change ineffective governance or managers
Most IT units find the visits a particularly important mechanism for
communicating architecture and its implications. At DBS, I archi-
tects have accepted responsibility for guiding managers toward
architecture acceptance. One architect noted: “We are seeing our-
selves more as architecture social workers rather than the architec-
ture police.”*

Web-Based Portals

Much communication around IT governance is to educate or-
ganizational members on IT governance processes, including spe-
cific procedures for mechanisms such as investment proposals,
architectural exceptions, and service-level agreements. Web-based
portals provide a central communications channel for many entet-
prises. IT governance owners use the portals to make announce-
ments and updates. Some portals have examples of IT investment
cases with templates. Other portals have lists of approved IT soft-
ware and hardware with instructions on ordering hardware and
software. Portals can also support IT governance by posting metrics

--- PAGE 64 ---
110 IT GOVERNANCE

its franchises employ more than 180,000 people in more than 140
countries,

Jn 2000, Chairman and CEO Marilyn Carlson Nelson articu-
lated a vision of presenting Carlson customers with an integrated
view of Carlson’s businesses." Traditionally, each operating group
functioned independently and was even encouraged to compete
with other operating groups. Nelson intended to change the rela-
tionship between operating groups from competition to collabora-
tion. She enlisted CIO Steve Brown to map out the technological
underpinnings for this change. Brown, who reports directly to the
CEO, was given responsibility for defining the role of IT for the in-
tegrated enterprise.

Brown defined two IT principles:

1. Application development can continue to take place within
operating groups, but applications should be presented to
users through a shared portal, and, where necessary, data
will be shared across business units.

2. Carlson will have a shared IT infrastructure.

To translate these principles into IT architecture and infrastruc-
ture, business applications, and IT investment decisions, Carlson
assigned IT governance respons{bilities to five decision-making
structures: the Carlson Technology Architecture Committees (CTAC)
residing in the operating groups, the Enterprise Architecture Orga-
nization (EA), the IT Council, the Carlson Shared Services Board,
and the Investment Committee. Our description of Carlson's Gov-
emance Arrangements Matrix is shown in figure 4-4

Decision-Making Structures

Each Carlson operating group has a Carlson Technology Architec-
‘ture Committee (CTAC) made up of technologists who take an op-
crating group perspective. The CTACs are primarily responsible for
meeting the needs of their operating groups within enterprise stan-
dards. CTACs also provide input into enterprisewide architecture
decisions.

CIO Brown set up the Enterprise Architecture Organization
(FAO) to facilitate enterprisewide standardization efforts under Mark

Mechanisms for Implementing IT Governance mm

Flaure 4-4

IT Governance at Carlson Companies

- DEcIsION
T Business
7 TT infastucture | Appioation 7

| rnetoies | arntecure | "Sates Teed” | Investment
oat [osce| wow [Decse|_ineat [oeiin| tt [Been| pa

ae
eo |

{©2208 Pa Soan SchcalCate or ntormaton St

70h OS, Used wih ersion

Price, Director of Information Technology. Price works with a team
of two architects from each operating group to establish and moni-
tor new technology standards, The Enterprise Architecture Organi-
zation sets corporatewide standards guiding the development ef-
forts of all the operating units.

‘The Executive Committee, including Brown, established Carl-
son Shared Services (CSS) to build the infrastructure capability de-
signed by the FAQ. CSS provides both IT infrastructure and finan-
ial services within the enterprise. The CSS Board, which comprises

--- PAGE 65 ---
2 IT GOVERNANCE

the CTOs and CFOs of the operating groups, examines any new
technologies from a financial point of view,

The IT Council is made up of the CTOs and ClOs of all the op-
erating groups. The Council meets monthly to talk about new tech-
nologies and ways technology can be leveraged across Carlson.
Finally, an Investment Committee, made up of members of the sen-
ior executive committee, gives final judgment on all large Carlson
‘Companies investment projects

These decision-making structures have clarified 1? governance
responsibilities at Carlson Companies and are consistent with the
CEO's vision for how the firm should operate. By soliciting input
from additional sources, these decision-making structures align IT
decisions with organizational goals, Carlson further benefits from.
alignment processes and communication tools to implement effec
tive governance throughout the enterprise.

Alignment Processes

‘The alignment challenge at Carlson involves balancing integration
across operiting groups with preserving sufficient autonomy to
allow each operating group to succeed in its market environment,
Key alignment processes at Carlson are its service catalog (compara-
ble to service-level agreements), its I’ Investment and funding ap-
proach, anid its architecture exception process

Service Catalog

Yo define and manage the portfolio of shared services offered
by CSS, Brown solicited Input from the CEOs of the operating
groups to ascertain their common business needs for infrastructure
services, Operating groups had the option to buy services exter-
nally, resulting in a mix of internally and externally provided ser-
vices, After “unbundling” every service used at Carlson, Brown and
the IT’ group collected eighty-nine services into a “service catalog.”
Each service definition was in industry standard terms and clearly
understood by the operating groups. Once the services were de-
fined, the IT group benchmarked them against thirty-six vendors
for cost and service-level availability. ‘The firm updates these bench-
marks annually, and the service catalog regularly facilitates conver-

‘Mechanisms for Inplementing IP Governance 1

sations between the IP group and business unit managers. Fo
example, if a business wants a given network service with 99.9!
percent reliability, then the catalog shows how much it will cost in:
house or from an outside vendor.

Investment and Funding Approach

Given the feudal approach to business applications, operating
groups fund thelr individual applications. The office of the CIO and
the operating groups share funding for enterprise architecture proj:
ects proportionally split by expected benefits from the initiative.
Every request goes through an Authorization-for-Funding Process.
The process requires details about what will be delivered and when,
and where the financial or business benefits will occur, Whoever
Proposes a project is held accountable for promised results. To sup:
port development of the enterprise architecture, Carlson's Capital
Budgeting Committee allocates some funding for architecture int-
tlatives to the CIO. This discretionary fund allows the CIO to seed
projects until operating groups can see benefits Irom them

Architecture Exception Process

Jo encourage collaboration between his office and the operat:
ing groups and to best reflect the needs of all the operating groups
in architecture decisions, Mark Price seeks input from a variety of
Individuals in the operating groups. He views his role as thal of a
facilitator: “Our approach in the Enterprise Architecture Organiza-
ton is really a facilitation office, We bring ideas and maybe some
technical resources to bear, bul the work and the design and the
people that are delivering come from the business units, We learn
where the business units have needs, and, if we architect to that
direction, we end up with a more feasible architecture.”

Ufa proposal from a business unit does not fit current standards,
the proposal is evaluated by the Enterprise Architecture Organiza-
tion (LAO). If the application is limited to one operating group, the
lechnology decision stays within the confines of the respective
CTAC. If eventually more than one operating group becomes inter
ested, then the EAO puts together a small working group made up
of one architect from each interested operating group. The working
group then defines the standard for the enterprise.

--- PAGE 66 ---
44 IT GOVERNANCE

These three processes—service catalog, investment and fund-
ing, and architecture exception—work with Carlson’s decision-
making structures to provide input to decision making and to
delegate ongoing decisions to appropriate individuals and teams

throughout-the firm.To-help individuals understand -how_gover-—__}

nance works and how they make it work, Carlson has implemented.
communication tools,

Communication Tools

Two key communication tools at Carlson are senior management
announcements and formal committees that disseminate their
decisions, CEO Nelson regularly shares her vision for Carlson,
including her rallying cry for an “integrated Carlson.” ‘The “inte-
grated Carlson” concept provides a constant reminder as to how
the firm wants to use IT, Simultaneously, committees with both
corporate and operating group members—most notably the Enter-
prise Architecture Office, the CSS Board, and the If Council—offer
recurring opportunities to communicate with key operating group
leaders to clarify If governance and its implications for the operat
ing groups.

Combined, the governance mechanisms at Carlson have sup-
ported Brown's efforts to reduce IT costs while moving the com-
pany closer to the CEO’s vision of an “integrated Carlson.” As at
Carlson, we recommend that every enterprise needs at least one
high-performing mechanism in each category. Having a smaller
humber of effective mechanisms is superior to having many mech-
anisms that may vary considerably in effectiveness and introduce
confusion about accountability.

Implementing Governance:
Principles for Mechanisms
This chapter has reviewed three types of IT governance mecha-

nisms and identified key mechanisms within each type. Individu-
ally, mechanisms should exhibit three characteristics:

1. Simple: Mechanisms unambiguously define the responsibil-
ity or objective for a specific person or group.

‘Mechan

ns for implementing IT Governance u

2. Transparent: EXfective mechanisms rely on formal processes,
How the mechanism works is clear to those who are alfecte
by or want to challenge governance decisions.

3. Suitable: Mechanisms engage individuals in the best post-
ms

Mechanisms, however, do not act in isolation, The impact 0
governance mechanisms depends on interactions among the mech
anisms, We observed five principles for designing effective sets 0
mechanism:

1. Choose mechanisms from all three types. Decision-making,
alignment, and communication mechanisms have different
objectives, All are important to effective governance.

2, Limit decision-making structures. Decision making in enter-
prises is not a “more the merrier” phenomenon. Complex
organizations require multiple decision-making structures,
but the more decision-making structures, the more oppor
tunities for contradictions and disconnections, Decision-
‘making responsibilities should be disseminated throughout
an enterprise using alignment mechanisms, not decision
making structures,

3. Provide for overlapping membership in decision-making
structures. {T governance requires serious input about both
strategic business needs and technology capabilities. To
‘ensure that these critical perspectives influence all IT gover
nance decisions, key decision-making bodies need overlap-
ping memberships or clear mandates. IT governance design
should avoid disconnects between IT and business decisions,

4. Lmplement mechanisms at multiple levels in the enterprise
Although diverse enterprises may have limited integration
and standardization requirements, a single business unit
may want tightly integrated processes. Accordingly, IT gov-
ernance design at the enterprise level reflects only one layer
of governance. Enterprise-level governance influences deci-
sions at the business unit level, but business units often
need their own governance arrangements and correspon-
ding mechanisms. Good governance in a multibusiness unit

--- PAGE 67 ---
Committees and IT budget processes often provide these
connections,

S” Clarity accountatsity fultiplemechanisms-can inadver. ———
tently create confusion over who is responsible for what or
Umit the ability of managers to manage outcomes for which
they are responsible. The design of IT governance should
clatify management objectives and metrics.

Specific mechanisms they implement,

WHAT GOVERNANCE arrangements work best? Senior managers
oma variety of businesses told us the following:

GO, financiat services fim

The governance procedures we developed brought transparency
and accountability into the process,

AO, national police force ofa European country

Everything that you try to Fe unplish fom an enterpuse perspec-
Sve is all bout identifying fwhat §5] Not unique to any one line of
business. We're able to identify something an, application, of a

SYP for proces, fnanciat services finn

When governance founders, things break dows

‘We were not making best use of...

--- PAGE 68 ---
ns IT GOVERNANCE

with some infrastructure thrown in. We used a full chargeback
‘model, so the first project needing a particular piece of infrastruc-
ture had to pay the entire cost of creating it.

CIO, government agency

‘What IT Governance Works Best 119

strategic, organizational, and cultural issues to design the optimal
IT governance for their firm.
Three questions best capture these insights:

‘+ How can we assess governance?

‘The governance board—composed of the corporate controller,
eight domestic ClOs (the most senior and seasoned), and three
regional ClOs (Asia, Europe, Latin America)—has been meeting,
for & year, but anyone who has attended the meetings views it as
dysfunctional, No one pays attention or takes it seriously.

CIO, global manufacturing firm

‘We have to rejustify our refresh strategy every year. What should
have been a ten-minute pitch took forty-five minutes. . .. The
management committee tumed into a team of volunteer archi-
tects to redesign cheaper desktops.

CIO, telecommunications inn

Do any of these situations sound familiar? ‘These quotations
illustrate the multifaceted nature of IT governance for large enter-
prises. Getting ten managers into a room to discuss their gover-
nanice challenges will generate at least ten opinions of what works
well, To date, there has been little experience-based research to
reveal what governance arrangements work best, and yet under-
standing what works best in general as well as in meeting particular
performance objectives informs governance design. This chapter
will provide some evidence and propose guiding principles for IT
governance arrangements at large, complex enterprises. ‘The princi-
ples come from measuring governance performance and financial
performance in a large sample of enterprises and analyzing quanti-
tatively and qualitatively which arrangements work best. The
resulting set of best practices provides insights into which of the six
governance archetypes (business or IT monarchy, feudal, duopoly,
federal, or anarchy) best support each of the five key IT decisions
(IT principles, infrastructure, architecture, business application
needs, and investment). You can use the resulting general gover-
nance principles as input, along with the more enterprise specific

‘+ What governance arrangements work best?

‘+ How do leading enterprises govern?

The answers should provide you with the language and evi
dence to tackle the governance issues in your enterprise. Since his-
torical performance in a large number of enterprises can indicate
only what worked elsewhere, senior management must combine
these general findings with the firm’s unique goals, strategies, and
cultural norms. Chapters 6, 7, and 8 address that challenge.

How to Assess IT Governance

We defined governance as specifying the decision rights and ac-
countability framework to encouraye desitable behavior in. 11
usage. Governance performance must then be how well the gove
nance arrangements encouraged desirable behaviors and ultimately
how well the firm achieved its desired performance goals. Yo pro:
vide some structure to this multifaceted issue, we use the frame:
work in figure $-1

We identified five important factors when assessing gover:
nance—enterprise setting, governance arrangements, governanc
awareness, governance performance, and financial performance.
assess governance performance, we measured each of these factors
‘We suggest using the framework to compare your enterprise with
those described here. Enterprise setting captures the industry, the size
the number of business units, and the relationship among the bust
ness units (the level of synergy desired between business units), Gov
mance arrangements describe which archetypes are used for eack
IT decision and which mechanisms are used for implementation
Governance awareness establishes how well everyone across. th
firm understands governance and identifies the communications ap
proaches to engaging management. The percentage of projects with
exceptions—both formally approved and renegade—indicates hoy

--- PAGE 69 ---
FIGURE 5-1

‘What IT Governance Works Best 42a

| uniformly people apply

the governance arrangements and what
| leaming results from change.

2 3 3. | Govemance performance assesses the effectiveness of IT gover-
. a u Fils ance in delivering four objectives weighted by their importance to
al yi a the enterprise:
CEL BR 3 4 ee
tblebu, 2 $8 ELSE
3) 2) 8s Bs vittectiy
Hi pee j B ahi 1. Cost-effective use of IT

2. Effective use of IT for asset utilization
3. Effective use of IT for growth
4. Effective use of IT for business flexibility

When assessing governance performance, senior managers list
identify the relative importance of these four factors in their enter-
prises and then rate enterprise performance on each factor. Using a
weighted average formula, they can calculate a score out of 100,
Appendix B contains the questions and the formula to calculate
governance performance; you can pause now to complete it so that
you can benchmark your enterprise against the following results,
Asking senior managers to rate the impact of governanice on firm
performance offers one perspective on the effectiveness of IT gover”
hance. But ultimately, we should see IT governance impact business
performance metrics, Although many other factors influence finan
cial performance measures, strong performance provides confi-
dence in the firm's IT governance. Assessing financial performance

&
§
5
8
4 $
8 i i requires financial metrics covering the major categories, We investi-
z } gated whether leaders in the following three dimensions of finan-
é 8 i 5 ial performance (adjusted for industry differences) governed dif-
fs 7 acs
3 H 3 355 j ferently from other firms:
£ : * Profit: Return on equity (ROL), return on investment (RON,
E . ; percent profit margin
g dre 8 3 * Asset utilization: Return on assets (ROA)
8 Tig e yg
E Higa. 3) ‘+ Growth: Percent change in revenue per annum?
F) gibt £ Ee F 3
elfbs 2 Bb ire 3) ‘We found firms that led their industries in each of these three
e)Ghih TE gaR =|
B1geck § Se ETE og) dimensions of performance governed differently from other firms.
3

‘We explore these differences later in the chapter.

--- PAGE 70 ---
122. IT GOVERNANCE

How Governance Varies Across Enterprises

Governance performance varies significantly across enterprises and.
is approximately bell shaped (figure $-2). The average governance

‘What IT Governance Wotks Best 123

industry-adjusted measures of financial performance (for example,
ROE and market capitalization growth). We are not saying gover
nance performance caused superior financial performance. However,
Wwe can say superior financial performers have high governance per-

Pe
and the top third performing firms had scores over 74. Only 17 per-

cent of enterprises scored 80 or above and only 7 percent scored 90
ot over. Achieving high governance performance meant that the
enterprise's IT governance succeeded in influencing the desired
measures of success. How does your enterprise compare?

Firms with above-average IT governance following specific
strategy (for example, customer intimacy) had a 20 percent higher
ROA than firms with poorer governance following the same strat-
egy. Governance was, of course, not the only factor, but good IT
governance often comes with focus and effective management
practices in all areas. The governance performance measure also
statistically significantly correlates with several three-year average

rioune 6-2

Wide Variance in Governance Performance

Percent of Enterprises
tl
|
|
|

wa Oe 5060 eae TOT) ae wO-D

Governance Performance

Resesich candice st 258 enterprises a wenty-tvee counties

£2000 Soa Schl Cane fr naan Syste Reese CSF) Uns wih porion

. P sme

We suggest that designing IT governance requires working from
left to right in figure 5-1 using the IT Governance Design Frame-
work (figure 1-3) and Governance Arrangements Matrix (figure 1-2).
To assist managers designing effective governance we now explore
what arrangements (a) work best as measured by governance px
formance and (b) are used by financially top-performing firms
Governance performance is a good broad measure of overall per-
formance, and the lessons from these top governance performers
can be applied in any situation. ‘Then we will Iearn from top
performers on a particular financial metric (say, growth) how to
target governance to more finely tuned financial goals. If perfor-
mance balanced across several performance goals is your objec:
tive, then focus on the governance performance findings. If you
have one clear and enduring financial metric as a target, then care-
fully consider the findings on financial performance governance
arrangements.

Seven Characteristics
of Top Governance Performers

‘We start by Leasing out what top governance performers do. that is
different from the other enterprises, Regardless of their industry,
level of IT investment, strategies, or any other factors, the high gov-
ernance performers differed from other enterprises on seven char-
acteristics. All the relationships with governance performance and
financial performance described in the remainder of this chapter
are statistically significant and thus unlikely to be due to chance.

‘The seven characteristics common to top performers are de-
scribed here in approximate order of impact from highest to lowest.
Consequently, we suggest addressing these issues in the order pre-
sented when refining or correcting IT governance. Figure 3-3 con-
tains selected benchmarks for best and worst performers.

--- PAGE 71 ---
124 IT GOVERNANCE

Flaune 5-3

Benchmarks for Best and Worst Performers

What IT Governance Works Best 2

nance

iply by engaging more often and more effectively. Top
performers effectively used the following five communication
mechanisms described in chapter 4. Communication approaches

Governance Bottom 50% of Top 50% of are listed in approximate order of impact; however, top performers
performance enterprises (scoro <63)__entarprises (score 269) effectively used all five.
Percent of managers ES 6

‘uo ean accurately
scribe governance

Percent of projects with Bo ash
renegade exceptions on
st least one companent

Percent of now ayatoms 2st
‘with agreed-upon

exceptions on a least

‘one component

‘Aveengo aumber of 3 1b
Cchangus in governanco
per yoor

row opratart ros overt oars,“ croming, 1 dscwaning, Fl

(© 200 I Slow Serco Canter er infrmaton Syste Ressach (C9R. Used wh pasion

1, More Managers int Leadership Positions Could Describe 1 Gov-
ernance, The most important predictor of top governance perform-
ance was the percentage of managers in lewlership positions who
could accurately describe their enterprise’s IT governance. The
higher the percentage of managers who could describe governance,
the higher the governance performance. When more managers can
accurately describe governance, governance is more likely to
become part of the enterprise's management culture—people fol-
low, challenge, and improve it. Without awareness of IT gover
hance, people cannot practice it. Neatly half the managers in the
above-average yovernance performers could describe governance
while fewer than 30 percent of managers in poorer performers
could do so (see figure 5-3). In only § percent of enterprises could
80 percent or more of managers in leadership positions describe
their IT governance, How do you compre?

2. Engage, Engage, Engage. Top governance performers achieved
a higher percentage of senior management knowledge about gover-

+ Senior management announcements: Reinforce and alert
governance changes

+ Formal committees: Add weight and cross-functional influ-
ence to governance

* Office of C1O oF IT governance: A recogni
and organizational home

ed advocate, owner,

+ Working with managers who don’t follow the rules: Dialog to
educate and address concerns

+ Portals or intranets with documented procedures: A single place
for governance information.

Top governance performers typically didn’t use informal mect-
ings with colleagues to communicate governance. Somehow the
topic of governance doesn't lend itself to informal chats in the cor
ridor, at the water cooler, ot in the cafeteria, Informal chats are
soon forgotten when participating managers go back to the hurly-
burly of e-mail, phone calls, and formal meetings.

. More Direct Involvement of the Senior Leaders in 1 Gover:
nance. Top management involvement is such an old chestaut that
wwe often forget its importance. Senior managers in top governance
performers were more directly involved in IT governance. The more
involvement, the better the governance performance. The man-
agers on the following list appear in the order of the relative effect
of their involvement on governance. The numbers in parentheses
approximate the leverage of each executive's effective involvement,
where the CIO is 1.0 on the index?

© Chief Executive Officer (2.1)
* Chief Operating Officer (1.7)
* Business Unit Leader (1.6)

--- PAGE 72 ---
126 IT GOVER

NANCE

+ Business Unit Chief Information Officer (1.3)

«= Chief Financial Officer (1.2)

«Chief Information Officer (L

For effective HP governance the C1O-mu

0)

volved, and in almost 100 percent of the firms studied the CIO was
Teading the governance charge. Effective involvement of the CIO in
IT governance is a necessary but not sufficient condition for effec
tive governance. The other senior managers provide significant

additional leverage when they are
ple, we estimate that the

effectively involved. For exam-

0 provides a leverage of over two times

aoe of the ClO, and the business unit leaders provide a leverage of

60 percent over the CIO alone

ithe challenge {s to find the right role for each senior manager:

For example, involving the CEO a
roles such as chairing the

few times a year in high-profile

vestment committee or announcing

governance changes is more effective than asking the CEO to
trend monthly steering committee meetings. The role of the busi-
hess unit CIO is also critical to enterprisewide governance. Business

‘unit ClOs often must desiga busin
tion, for effective enterprisewide

ess unit IT governance. In addi-
governance the business unit

Clos are typically involved in setting high-level architecture, More

important, business unit CIOs act

as advocates for enterprisewide

governance, Business unit CIOs often have dual ceporting relation-
ships to the CEO or CEO of their business unit as well a5 f0 the cor-
porate CIO, These dual relationships ate challenging Put valuable
for balancing business unit and enterprise priorities, Incentives,
transfer pricing, shared infrastructure, and best of all, reduced cost

to the business units from econom|
tionships work.

jes of scale help make dual rela-

4, Clearer Business Objectives for IT Investment. Top governance
performers had clearer objectives for IT investment—a few impor-
tant objectives, not a long, undifferentiated list. The most common,

objectives were a subset of three or

© Reduce costs.

+ Improve customer service.

four of the following:

‘What IT Governance Works Best _—

« Provide information to management.

« Enhance customer communication.

‘+ Support new ways of doing business.

‘+ Enablea complete view of the customer. __

+ Improve product quality.

“The more focused the objective, the easier itis to design IT gov-
emance. Having a larger number of objectives and thus more desir
able behaviors leads to confusing and sometimes conflicting mes-
sages and processes. Of all the characteristics of top governance
performers, this is pethaps the most difficult to achieve Complex.
enterprises have multiple and sometimes competing objectives,
and IT governance has to operate in that environment, Nonethe-
less, top governance performers seem to pick the most Important
objectives and design governance for them.

45. More Differentiated Business Strategies. ‘lop governance pet
formers had more differentiated business strategies basedon value
disciplines such as customer intimacy or product innovation.! Gov"
temance performance was lower in enterprises pursuing operational
excellence. Operational excellence is a less differentiated strategy De-
cause it focuses on efficiencies, and the vast majority of enterprises
sre concerned about cost. Our sens¢ is that operational excellence is
dften the default strategy of enterprises without clear strategy. Thus,
this fifth characteristic is related to the need for strategic focus
“described earlier. Where operational excellence is the deliberate (not
default) enterprise strategy (for example, commodity products and
low-cost service providers), managers must drill down to the next
level of detail to design appropriate governance. What are the specific
desirable behaviors for achieving the enterprise's particular style of
operational excellence? How can governance encourage the behav-
iors? We will explore this question in chapter 6.

6. Fewer Renegade and More Formally Approved Exceptions, The
average enterprise in our study reported that the architecture: e+
ception process permitted exceptions to agreed-upon IT standards
in 30 percent of its new systems, An additional 20 percent of the

--- PAGE 73 ---
128 If GOVERNANCE

new systems had unapproved exceptions to agreed-upon TT stan-
dards (renegade exceptions). This latter statistic shows the immatu-
rity of the IT architecture processes in most enterprises.

Because of the pace of technology change, exceptions to stan-
dards are inevitable. But enterprises manage exceptions differenth

‘what IT Governance Works Best 129

What Governance Arrangements Work Best

Reyond the seven characteristics, top yovemance performers used
particular patterns of archetypes in their governance arrangements.
Actoss all the enterprises studied, certain pattems of governany

Top governance performing enterprises have fewer renegade excep-
tions and more exceptions that occur through a formal approval
process. The arrows in the table in figure $-3 indicate the trends for
exceptions over a three-year period, Top performers had fewer rene-
gade exceptions, and the number was decreasing. They had a fairly
constant percentage of new systems with approved exceptions,

_ 7. Kewer Changes in Governance from Year to Year, ‘The process
of changing governance arrangements, communicating the changes,
and institutionalizing the new governance is lengthy. COs report
that the time to implement a change in IT governance varies from
six months to a year, A major change would involve changing who
had decision rights for at least one of the key I'' decisions. Changes.
in governance for one decision often have implications for the
other four decisions,

Changing governance frequently is confusing to all the man-
agers trying to follow it and often results in managers throwing
their hands up in frustration and ignoring governance completely.
How often to change governance is therefore a delicate balancing
act. Changing governance too often leads to feustration and lower
governance performance. But leaving poor governance in place
is no better: If an enterprise's existing governance conflicts with
how the enterprise wants to make decisions, then senior managers
shoukl advocate changing the governance arrangement for a deci-
sion or instituting a new committee or process to support a key
decision, This kind of major change may also result from a strategic
shift or redefinition of desirable behavior. Otherwise, governance
design should remain fairly stable to avoid the cost of explaining
the change. The enterprise can incorporate new knowledge, new
people, smaller changes in strategy, and new organizational re-
quirements by fine-tuning governance design, such as changing
key committee members, adding responsibilities to an existing
decision-making structure, or revising the parameters of scrvice-
level agreements

arrangements generally surpassed others. We will first discuss what
works best for providing input and then move to what works best
for decision making

Providing Input

In general, enterprises with higher governance performance used
federal input models for IY principles and business application
needs, In contrast, enterprises with lower governance performance
had duopoly input for IT principles and business application needs,
For input to the other three decisions, no governance arrangements
were generally inferior or superior; the best approach depended on
the specific needs of the enterprise.

Asa starting point, we recommend federal governance arrange
ments for input to all five key I’ decisions and particularly for IT
principles and business application needs. The federal model for
input provides a browd-based vehicle for capturing the tradeoffs
between the desires of the senior corporate managers and the man:
agers in the business units, The federal model addresses the time:
honored tension between what should be shared and what should
be locally determined, Sharing can enable economies of scale andl
standardization as well as delivering on enterprisewide strategies
such as presenting a single face to the customer, The governance
of Motorola described in figure 3-7 illustrates federal inputs for
principles.

Designing a successful federal model for applications is even
more difficult than designing one for principles. Business unit
heads naturally want their business needs met and are typically less
interested in the needs of the center or other business units. The
less synergy across business units, the more the business unit heads
need independence, Where there are cross-business unit processes
(customer relationship management, for example), the pressures
for sharing applications increase. Top governance performers heav-
ily used business relationship managers, chargeback, and executive

--- PAGE 74 ---
130 IT GOVERNANCE

committees to provide input to decisions on principles and busi-
ness application needs. All three of these mechanisms explicitly
balance the needs of the business units and the corporate center.
‘The duopoly model for input to IT principles and business appli
cation needs is typically too restrictive. Limiting the input to IT and.

What IT Governance Works Best 131

FIGURE 5-4

Best and Worst Governance Performers Use Different Arrangement:

\ cocoon 7 T T Busines 7

one other group often creates a feeling of disenchantment or non-
transparency with the process, Worse still, the process can be seen as
rigged to benefit the parties consulted for input. ‘The duopoly model
roves very elfective for decision making but is generally less effective
for providing input. Instead, broad-based inputs with mechanisms
‘enabling clear and fair representation work best for providing input.

Making Decisions

Figure 5-4 summarizes the most and least effective governance
arrangements for input and decision making to achieve governance
performance.’ Fiems with high governance performance typically
steered away from federal models for most of their IT decisions
and used IT duopolies for the critical decisions of IT principles and
investments

Why Federal Models Struggle

Enterprises using federal decision-making arran
scored poorly on governance performance. Many factors explain
why federal models are less effective for decision making, including
less speed and a tendency to overly compromise and trade away
effectiveness, Federal decision-making arrangements often take
longer as more people and stages are involved and there is less
agreement on the objectives for the decisions. The long cycle times
compound the problems faced by enterprises with poor governance
because they continue to perform poorly until intervention occurs.
Worse still, when compromises are made to “keep everybody
happy,” neither the business units nor the enterprise achieves what
is really needed. Federal models predicted poorer performance in
four out of the five key IT’ decisions.

While federal decision-making arrangements are generally less
effective, a few enterprises have overcome their limitations by es-
tablishing enterprise success as an important goal for all managers.

Principles | Architecture | “Stratoyies | Needs.” | Invostmont
= [et Joson_tet once] Fa [sein] tot [Bn] weet

Menary |

Poor parsrnes (= op setorere

1 2002 MI Sa Scho! Carina Syston

‘The chairman and CEO of UPS, reflecting on his thirty years with
the company, described the time when he represented & business
unit on a federal I’ decision-making committee,

‘Our culture, traditions, legacy, and length af service gives us a Jol
of confidence that we can tely on each other... you can do things
in the best interest of the total. I think about when we built the I
steering committee, ... Twas in ait, someone else in engineering,
someone else in finance, someone else in HR, someone else in
R&D—eight different functions that came together, Each of us
would come with orders from our bosses to make sure we got what
we needed in our parts of the business... . somehow along the line
we would say, “But the best thing for the company isn’t ming; it's
the DIAD [handheld computer used by UPS truck drivers] or the
di T would go back and my buss
would say at the time, "Did you get what we needed?" and 1
would say, “No, we got something better, something better for the
company."

livery record automation.”

--- PAGE 75 ---
132 LP GOVERNANCE

Few enterprises can boast of the longevity of UPS managers on
their IT steering committees. Even UPS, whose culture encouraged
commitment to enterprise goals, later dropped the federal model in.
favor of a business monarchy for IT investment, On the other
hand, federal models are a viable approach to decisions on business
application needs. If business unit representatives are rewarded for
achieving both enterprise and business unit objectives, they can
work in a federal model to distinguish shared and unique applica
tion needs. For business applications needs, enterprises with feudal
decision-making arrangements had lower governance performance;
even with few synergies among business units, the [eudal model
underperformed. For business application needs, the appropriate
model depends on the enterprise's strategic needs. Highly inte-
grated or synergistic business units thrive under more centralized
decision making, such as a business monarchy or federal arrange-
ments. Where [ewer synergies exist, If duopolies work well when
the IT group works bilaterally with each business unit to satisfy in-
dividual needs.

Why Duopolies Work for Decision Making

Top governance performers often used IT duopolies for both
If principles and investments, the two most strategic of the five
key IT decisions, because principles set the role for the enterprise's IT
and investments establish commitment and priorities. Some IT and.
business process standards may be nonnegotiable, but the duopoly
approach enables joint decision making between the business lead~
ers and IT professionals, allows for creative business solutions
within agreed-upon constraints, but remains focused on the particu-
Jar business issue at hand. Unlike federal models, wherein managers
must balance the interests of the center and all the business units,
duopolies maintain strategic focus and typically perform better,
‘Two popular mechanisms for implementing duopolies are busi-
ness/IT relationship managers (often the business unit ClOs) and
process teams with If members. Business/t? relationship managers
support the bicycle wheel model of the IT duopoly (see Agure 3-3),
‘The relationship manager leverages IT for maximum business value
and pushes for IT services that address their business unit needs.
‘The process team mechanism implements the ‘-shaped duopoly.

‘What IT Governance Works Best 133

Process teams work toward an enterprise's desired operating model
with IT to enable enterprisewide processes.

Three Successful Patterns of Governance Performance

Among the 256 firms, the governance arrangements varied
markedly. For each of the five key IT decisions, management can
choose among six governance archetypes, yielding thousands of
possible combinations. The ten most popular combinations ac-
counted for 25 percent of the enterprises; the three most successful
of these ten arrangements in terms of governance performance
appear in figure 5-5. all three of these arrangements balance multi-
ple performance objectives such as cost, growth and flexibility
Arrangement 1 had duopolies (the CxOs and IT, perhaps using
Fshaped committees) for principles and investment, [f monar-
chies for infrastructure and architecture, and a federal structure for
business application needs. This arrangement requires [ groups to
understand the business needs, and requires business and IT to trust
each other. The federal model for application needs can exploit

‘Top Three Governance Performers

asin

e ir fr tnastructure | Appioation 1
a te

vor we

GD) BAG = tp tne gona searners ening fur pavers castes neh by parr.

+2000 Stsan Senet Canter toaion Sytem ecoach (1S). Us wih perscion

--- PAGE 76 ---
134 TT GOVERNANCE

potential synergies across business units as would a ‘shaped du-
opoly for investment, Arrangement 2 was similar, with a duopoly
for application needs and a business monarchy for investment. Ar-
rangement 2 works well for enterprises with fewer synergies using a
bicycle wheel duopoly for application needs,

Arrangement 3 was much more centralized, with business mon-
archies for all decisions except federal arrangements for business
application needs. More centralized approaches are typically used
in single business unit firms or where profitability or cost control is
more important, Arrangement 3 requires business leaders who care
and know about IT issues—often due to the CIO's educating the
senior management team. Arrangement 3 is also sensible when
major changes are occutting and decision rights must be tightly.
heekt (during mergers, major cost cutting, crises, and so on). Figure
5-5 illustrates how the five decision-making approaches fit together
into @ reinforcing total governance design, For example, an IT
monarchy for IT architecture can work well when IT’ principles set
by a business monarchy or a duopoly guide the architecture.

Who Makes Better IT’ Decisions?

With all the possible combinations, we wanted to understand
which managers, on average, make consistently better TT dec
business or IT professionals. The results from the 256 firms studied
indicate that joint decision making is best for many decisions (figure
5-6). The vertical dimension of the table divides the five key IT deci-
sions into the thrce business-oriented (principles, business applica-
tions, and investments) and the two more technical (architecture,
infrastructure) decisions. The horizontal dimension of the table
divides the archetypes into decisions by business leaders, clecisions
by technical leaders, and decisions taken jointly.’ The numbers in
the cells add to one hundred and are the percentage of decisions
across all the enterprises by each combination, For example, 29 per-
cent of all IT decisions were business-oriented decisions by business
people. Twenty-seven percent of all IP decisions were technical in
nature and macle by IT people. Adding across the rows indicates the
percentages of each decision type (business or technical). Adding the
columns indicates the percentage by each decision maker (business,
technical, or joint). For example, 32. percent of decisions were joint

ions —

What IT Governance Works Best 135

FiguRE 5-6

Who Makes Better IT Decisions—Business or IT Managers?

DECISION RIGHTS (20)

Business (T __doint
Business @
SIT preps oy
Business 2 ; ae | 2m petamey
spaleatin D Na ire

Peer pares

Types of | state sit
T

Decisions tantaatonst |

tects |

‘The symbols in cach cell represent the relationship between the
decision approach and governance performance, The top gover-
nance perlormers were mote likely to make business-oriented IT
decisions jointly. In the poorer governance performers, business
managers were more likely to make business-oriented IT decisions
alone, All other combinations of decision and decision maker per
formed the same.

‘We derived some genera! principles from this analysis. Untess
there are compelling reasons to do otherwise:

+ Business and IT professionals should collaborate on business-
oriented IT decisions (investment, principles, and business
application needs). Several mechanisms cin help to imple-
ment this approach: joint committees, process teams with
IT membership, budgeting processes with separate business
and I approval stages, and so on.

‘+ Business people should not make business-oriented IT deci-
sions alone. Better decisions require the fusion of business,
and 11 thinking,

--- PAGE 77 ---
136 TY GOVERNANCE

# ‘The best arrangement of decision rights for technical dect-
sions depends on other factors such as the synergies
between business units, the current IT portfolio, strategic
goals, industry differences, and so on.

How Leading Financial Performers Govern

So far in this chapter we have focused on what governance generally
‘works best for broad-based multifaceted performance. But beyond
these general principles, governance must be tailored to the enter
prise's strategies and performance goals, We now look at governance
design at for-profit firms that lead their peers on particular financial
measures. We considered three different performance goals and as-
sociated measures: asset utilization, growth, and profit (figure $-7)

To determine how leading financial performers govern, we cor-
related governance arrangements with financial performance for
the previous three years relative to competitors." ‘fo generate the
governance pattems for top financial performers in Figure 5-7 @
number of assumptions are made (some of which we deseribe in
the endnotes). As a result, the patterns of top performers should be
viewed as indicative only and not definitive evidence. The next
thice sections describe governance at listed for-profit firms who
have higher performance or faster improvements. Not all firms that
led on a particular performance measure governed the same way,
but the patterns were observed and persuasive and supported by
the case studies, For example, firms that led on growth had rela-
tively decentralized IT governance, giving a lot of discretion to the
business units. Firms that led on profit had more centralized yover-
nance to facilitate reducing duplication and cost control.

Leaders on Asset Utilization

Firms leading on asset utilization (as measured by ROA) need pro-
active decision makers who look for opportunities to share and
reuse IT actoss business units, business processes, and regions. For
TT assets, the leading firms typically accomplish this drive for asset
utilization through a pattern of duopoly governance on all five IT
decisions (see figure 5-7). In the duopoly model, the IT group plays

‘What IT Governance Works Best 137

FIGURE 5-7

How Top Financial Performers Govern

- Décision
w 1 ingasrucure | Appieation |r
Princnis_| Architecture "Staton "Reade |_ investment

Sosy | on waa fon wo | ro

an important coordinating role as it is one of the few groups that
interact with all business units and see finmwide opportunities for
sharing and reuse.

Actoss the five decisions, the two types of duopoly governance
described in figure 3-3 are both important for asset utilization, Each,
type of duopoly brings together business and IT executives; a
‘Eshaped duopoly brings together senior executives to encourage
greater synergies across the enterprise, while a bicycle wheel estab-
lishes relationships to help business units extract value from enter
prise capabilities. Key mechanisms implementing these duopolies
Include executive committees, process teams, business-IT relation-
ship managers, and IT architecture committees

Citicorp was an early adopter of the T-shaped approach in 1996
and a very successful exploiter of IT, Citicorp’s strategic context re-
quired that business and IT managers work together in a duopaly
to understand their mutual challenges and responsibilities.” To
create this fusion in the consumer banking area, two overlapping

--- PAGE 78 ---
138 IT GOVERNANCE,

committees that met quarterly provided technology policy and
oversight in the bank. The Global Consumer Council, chaired by
the senior vice president of marketing, brought together the senior
marketing managers and included the senior technology officer,
“iticorp’s top information technology executive. The Global Con-
sumer Technology Group, chaired by the senior technology officer,
brought together the senior technology managers from the con-
sumer banking area and included the senior marketing vice presi-
dent. The two groups had adjacent meeting times, and some of
their meetings were held jointly. Many firms have adapted this
model to suit their needs.

Business/IT relationship managers (for example, business unit
C1Os) effectively connect the business units to the central IT group,
enabling the identification of opportunities for reuse, synergies,
and shared services. At the same time, the business/IT relationship
managers ensure that the business needs of their business unit are
met, Enterprises effectively using business/I relationship man-
agers mentioned elsewhere in. the book inchide DBS Bank, Abbey
National Group, and Scotland Yard.

Process teams with IT members help develop both the process
leadership and the IT infrastructure to enable enterprise system im-
plementations and cross-functional business processes. The ERP
implementations at MeadWestvaco and Dow Coming highlight the
benefits of process teams. Architecture committees are also important
for asset utilization. In a duopoly structure, these committees of both,
IT and business experts encourage reuse to ensure a robust architec-
ture and strict adherence to tectinical standards. To drive economies,
the IT group regularly assesses the set of bilateral relationships for
opportunities for synergy and economies of scale. Where can the
same system, data, infrastructure, module, capability be shared?

Duopolies are also used for the Ir investment decision to ensure
that IT spending is balanced between the needs of the business unit
strategy and the needs of the enterprise to utilize assets. Leaders
on asset utilization often effectively use chargeback. Understanding
and exposing costs of IT, particularly infrastructure, supports shar-
ing and reuse, Firms leading on asset utilization don’t spend any
more or less on IT as a percentage of expenses than other firms. They
simply drove for better utilization of their IT assets.

‘What IT Governance Works Best 139

In summary, firms wanting to lead on asset utilization can learn
from the top performers that:

* Set IT principles with a strong flavor of asset utilization via
duopoly of the CxOs and the IT group. Use duopolies to
‘make investment decisions balances business needs with
sharing and reuse.

Create an IV architecture committee of business and It peo-
ple to design an enterprise architecture and manage com-
mitment to shared infrastructure.

* Assign business/IT relationship managers focused on achiev-
ing business value from IT for their business units and lever-
aging enterprisewide infrastructure,

* Establish a technical core of infrastructure and architecture
providers who plan and implement the enterprise's technol-
ogy platform and interact with the business/IT relationship
managers.

* Institute a regular review process that brings together busi-
ness unit and IT leaders to look for synergies, reuse, and
trends across operational units.

Involve IT architects in business unit projects to facilitate
education and effective use of shared infrastructure and
architecture standards.

* Develop a chargeback system to help business tnit leaders
see the value of shared services and make effective decisions
on IT use.

Leaders on Profit

Enterprises leading on profit (as measured by ROI and ROE) tended
to havea more centralized governance approach. Typically these en-
terprises have business monarchies for IT principles, high-level IT
architecture, and IT investment decisions. They use either business
or IT monarchies for infrastructure decisions and federal arrange-
ments for business application needs. Leaders on profit using these
governance arrangements require [I-savvy business leaders to make

--- PAGE 79 ---
140, IT GOVERNANCE

decisions—particularly IT architecture decisions. in these firms the
business architecture—the linking of key business processes inter
nally and with business partners—drives the high-level IT’ architec-
ture that is strictly enforced.

Leaders on profit made effective use of executive and senior
management committees to achieve cost control and standardiza-
tion, For architecture, standardization occurs through business de-
cision making with the IT group providing advice, education, and re-
search, Business-driven standardization limits costly exceptions to
standards but does not eliminate the importance of an exception pro-
coss to enable learning, Profit leaders successfully use federal arrange-
ments for business application needs, nicely balancing with business
monarchies for IT principles. The federal arrangements ensure a con-
sistency actoss the operational units with firmwide strategies while
recognizing the differences between business units. This type of fed-
eral arrangement requires a supportive incentive scheme, IT invest-
ments are also centeally controlled via business monarchies that con-
sider IP spending in the context of all spending. There was some
evidence that profit leaders on profit actually spent more on IT.

Centralized decision making facilitates standardization and
shared services, thereby enhancing profitability via both cost re-
ductions and fast time to market in new regions. For example,
Citibank Asia set up a Regional Card Centre (RCC) in Singapore in
1989 as a shared service to support start-up credit card businesses
in Southeast Asia.** This shared service had a direct impact on the
operating performance of each country manager whose credit card
data-processing operations were consolidated, so not all existing,
country managers immediately bought into the concept. Managers
who used the shared services demanded exacting performance
standards (rom the center. By 1992, in the midst of heightened cost
consciousness, the cost per card was down to 32.5 percent of the
1989 cost. None of the country managers wanted to revert to de-
centralized credit card operations; who wants cost per card to triple
ovemight? The cost economies offered by the RCC attracted the
countries to use shared services,

‘The RCC evolved from processing credit cards for ten countries
in 1993 to processing credit cards for twenty-six countries in
1999—twelve countries in Asia, seven in Central Europe and the
Middle East, and eight in Latin America. Average costs in 1999 were

What IT Governance Works Best 4a

+40 percent less than they were three years earlier. Today many more
countries across the world use the shared services. In addition to
credit card processing, the RCC provides services including produc-
tion support, software design for new products, acceptance testing,
compliance with the constantly changing rules of Visa, Master-
Card, and Diners Chub, and dissemination of best practices and cor-
porate quality initiatives, The cost reductions afforded by standard.
ization and centralized processing inherent in shared services are
impressive. The existence of “starter kits” also makes adding new
countries relatively easy and inexpensive

In summary, firms wanting to lead on profitability can learn
from the top performers that:

Staff an IT steering committee with capable business execu-
tives who take responsibility for enterprisewide IT gover~

hance decisions and set IT principles with a strong flavor of
cost control.

* Carefully manage the firm’s IT and business architecture to
drive out business costs. IT monarchies manage and enforce
the architecture and work with business monarch
architectures

8 to set

Design rigorous architecture exception processes to mini
mize costly exceptions and enable learning.

© Crea

fe a centralized IT organization designed to manage
frastructure, architecture, and shared services,

+ Use linked IT’ investment and business needs processes that
both make transparent and balance the needs of the center
and the operational units.

+ In

ute an IT investment process that requires centralized
coordination and approval of IT investments.

* Design a simple chargeback and service-level agreement
mechanism to clearly allocate IT expenses.

Leaders on Growth

Leaders on revenue growth have governance structures striving
to balance the dominant entrepreneurial needs of the operational

--- PAGE 80 ---
ae IT GOVERNANCE

units with the fiemwide business objectives. Business monarchies
set IT’ principles to balance (or at least attempt to balance) opera-
tional unit and firmwide goals. These principles typically focus on
growth and empower the operational units to be innovative and
not too concerned about standardization—that can come later.

IT investments are governed by either feudal or business mon-
archy arrangements. Feudal governance for investments allows
each of the units to independently invest in IT to support their in-
dividual strategies. In high-growth firms, the operational units with
intimate customer contact typically drive the growth by anticipat-
ing and responding to customer needs. The operational units want
and need control over their IT investments to enable fast imple-
mentations and to experiment with new products and services.
Where more firmwide synergies are desired (for example, a single
point of customer contact across multiple business units or sharing
resources), business monarchies would be used for IT investment.
High-growth firms, more than other firms, have effective mecha-
nisms for tracking the business value of IT.

Interestingly, there is no dominant governance approach for IT
infrastructure strategies or architecture for high-growth enterprises.
Firms use a variety of IT infrastructure governance arrangements to
enable last growth. The key to fast growth is customer responsive-
ness. Leading firms accomplish this responsiveness with more in-
vesment in operational unit infrastructures rather than firmwide
infrastructures." Local unit infrastructures are more tailored to the
strategic needs of the business units and are usually less integrated
in the firmwide systems. The lower integration enables faster time
to market for IT-enabled products and services—integration can
occur later.

Maintaining IT architectures in high-growth firms is. . . chal-
lenging. High-growth firms used no dominant governance arrange-
ment for architecture. Many high-growth firms reported having a
number of IT’ architectures rather than one—pethaps equal to the
‘number of operational units! This proliferation was equally evident
whether the growth was achieved organically or via acquisition.
The only chance of creating an integrated, rational, scalable 17
architecture occurs if the IT group has decision rights. A typical
model sends IT proposals from the operational units to IT for archi-

What IT Governance Works Best 143,

tecture screening, To be successful ancl perceived as helping rather
than obstructing the operational units, the architecture process
must be very fast and flexible. For example, corporate CIOs in high-
growth firms rely heavily on personal relationships involving a
one-on-one influence with business leaders and facilitating com-
munities of IT’ management interest.

In high-growth firms, business monarchies identify strategic
business application needs. Typically, demand for IT outstrips avail-
able IT resources, so business monarchies identify the key require-
ments for the processes that will distinguish the enterprise from
its competitors. However, high-growth firms often struggle to
precisely define business application needs. In their fast-paced en-
vironment, the business needs change constantly and often dur
ing systems acquisition, construction, or consolidation. To simul-
tancously define and meet market needs, high-growth firms use
prototyping and different types of extreme development, Many
high-growth firms report business application needs as the least
successfully governed of the five key IT decisions; they are probably
creating integration challenges down the road.

Manheim Auctions, the U.S. market leader in business-to-
business car auctions, successfully auctions over $50 billion of used.
cars each year.” In recent years, Manheim introduced online aue-
tions and now auctions around 150,000 cars each year on line. In
addition, the Manheim Market Report, compiled from the firm’s
countrywide auctions, provides invaluable information to car deal-
ers and other industry participants and is available on line, on per~
sonal data assistants, and on paper.

To launch this fast-growth online business and reinforce its dom-
inant position in the industry, Manheim created an independent
business unit, Manheim Online. Hal Logan, the CEO of Manheim
Online, worked with the senior management team to define princi-
ples and strategic business requirements. Like most high-growth
start-ups, the firm did not tightly govern architecture or infrastruc-
ture, focusing instead on managing projects for rapid development.

Mantheim’s development teams were responsible for all aspects
of deploying a new Manheim Online service: product manage-
ment, Web server selection and management, and development
and quality assurance of the service. Eventually the teams’ focus on

--- PAGE 81 ---
1a IT GOVERNANCE

speed of system delivery became unsustainable. Manheim Online's
Director of Software Development Steve Crawford reflected on this
situation: “The ability to always respond quickly eventually’
a problem. We became very good at scrambling to meet demands
very quickly, but that has a cost and eventually we just said, ‘Okay,
we're out of magic dust now.’ We needed to rethink."

At that point, Manheim Online identified a need for greater
attention to architecture and to reusable infrastructure services.
Today the online business is carefully integrated into the overall
Manheim Auctions business model. In addition, system delivery re-
sponsibilities have been redefined. The product management team
is responsible for defining the product vision and managing the
deployment of the product, thereby sheltering the development
group so that they can focus on software development. The quality.
assurance group is responsible for testing new services. The director
of software development described the process of introducing
greater discipline into the development environment: “There have
been a lot of growing pains along with that change. A lot of people
liked the small company kind of atmosphere that we had because
they got to wear lots of hats and do lots of things. It was a great
place to learn a whole lot because it was very fast-paced and there
were very sharp business people here.""*

The example demonstrates the value of focusing governance on
defining strategic business needs and application development pro-
cesses during periods of high growth. As growth slows and enter-
prises mature, firms need different skills, cultures, and IT governance.

In summary, firms wanting to lead on growth can learn from
the top performers that:

+ Empower the business units to drive IT investment—often
achieved by setting IT principles with a strong flavor of
innovation and market responsiveness.

* Create a more decentralized IT organization with structure
and capabilities designed to focus on immediate needs of
critical business processes.

* Place IT professionals into operational units focused on.
meeting their internal and external customers’ needs.

what IT Gover

nance Works Best las

* Create substantial operational unit-based IT infrastructure
capability tailored to local needs and linked into an often
less substantial enterprisewide infrastructure.

* Enable a technical core of infrastructure and architecture
providers who plan and implement the enterprise's technol-
ogy platform, identifying any critical integration requiie-
ments. These experts should identify the minimal standards
necessary for required levels of security, reliability, and inte-
gration because the enterprise will largely sacrifice integra
tion for functionality and speed. The technical core of infra-
structure providers also needs to be skilled at creating
synergies and integrating after systems are operational.

+ Implement a regular review process for formal tracking of
the business value of IT.

‘* Work with the operational units to provide education about
how to use IT to enable growth.

Designing Governanc
Lessons from Leading Enterprises

In this chapter we looked at what works best for multiple perfor-
mance goals and for leading on a specific mettic. Each enterprise
must actively design its IT governance, combining its unique needs
with the lessons of what works best for other organizations. Follow-
ing is a checklist of what works best for consideration when design-
ing governance. In the next chapters, we will look at how enter-
prises craft governance to suit their strategies.

1. How do you compare to the leading governance performers
on the seven characteristics they have in common?
+ Can more than $0 percent of managers in leadership
positions accurately describe IT governance?
* Is TT governance effectively communicated across the
enterprise using a variety of approaches?

+ Are senior managers thoughtfully involved in IT
governance?

--- PAGE 82 ---
146

IT GOVERNANCE

© Are there clear business objectives for IT investment?

© Are differentia

{ved business strategies clearly articulated?

+ Are there fewer renegade and more formally approved
exceptions?

+ Is there only one (or fewer) major change in governance
from year to year?

The following principles should be considered as the default
or starting point for governance arrangements (when all else
is equal).

+ Use federal arrangements for input into all IT decisions.

+ Use duopoly atrangements for IT principles and invest-
ments decisions.

+ Avoid federal decision making for all decisions if possible
If federal models are used, they require the maturity to
balance the needs of the center and the business units
and a supportive incentive scheme.

* Use joint decision making involving business and IT deci-
sion makers for the business-oriented I'v decisions of
investment, principles, and business application needs,

Moderate these general principles according to the enter-

ptise’s dominant performance goals.

+ Top performers on asset utilization typically use duopoly
arrangements.

+ Top performers on profit apply more centralized gover
nance, often using monarchies for decision making,

+ Top performers on growth strive to balance the entrepre-
neurial needs of the operational units with firmwide
strategies and principles. [T investments are governed by
cither feudal or business monarchy arrangements with
attempted centralized decision making for business appli-
cation needs.

+ Further customize these principles with the enterprise's
unique strategy and desirable behaviors

Linking Strategy,
IT Governance,
and Performance

SENIOR MANAGEMENT TEAMS often question the value they
receive for their IT investments, Most have experienced a number
of [i-related frustrations: huge expenditures for multiple custorner
service systems that still cannot consolidate all a customer's inter
actions; laege-scale enterprise system implementations that wreak
more havoc than process improvement; rapidly escalating annual
operating expenses without a corresponding escalation in bottom
line results; virus or worm infections shutting down operations;
and multimillion-dollar investments in initiatives like Y2K remedi-
ation, which sustain—but do not improve—performance. Among.
the many knee-jerk management team responses to these frustra-
tions, firing the CIO and outsourcing all of IT have emerged as
perennial favorites, The problem with these two solutions is that,
for most enterprises, they do not attack the cause of the problem—
poorly designed IT governance, often with a corresponding lack of
business leadership participation in the key I’ decisions

IY governance is a senior management responsibility. IF IF is
not generating value, senior management should first examine
its IT governance practices—who makes decisions and how the de-
cision makets are accountable, In this chapter, we look at how
to design governance, elaborating on the IT Governance Design

way

--- PAGE 83 ---
18 IT GOVERNANCE

Framework introduced in chapter 1, We explore alternative gov-
emance designs intended to reinforce business strategies built
around different value disciplines (operational excellence, product
leadership, or customer intimacy). We also address how enterprises
design governance to transcend organizational structures and en-
courage the desired level of synergy (or autonomy) between differ-
ent business units. We describe how governance evolves as IT be-
comes more strategic and executives better understand the costs
and benefits of IT-enabled business processes. Case studies of two
financial services firms—JPMorgan Chase and State Street Corpora:
illustrate these concepts.

Six Interlocking Components
of Effective Governance Design

Enterprises with effective IT governance clearly articulate and then
harmonize six components in the Governance Design Tramework
Introduced in chapter 1 (figure 6-1). Frleyprise strategy ane organiza
fion define the desirable behaviors motivating governance. Enter-
prises design IT governance arrangements for each of theit six key as-
sets including IT to both enable and influence strategy. Governance
arrangements assign decision rights for the key decisions guiding
each asset individually and collectively. The effectiveness of an en-
Lorprise’s strategies and its combined governance arrangements are
reflected in its ability to achieve stated business performance goals. In
this book we focus on the IT asset, but parallel (and interconnected)
governance processes for the other five assets are needed,

‘The bottom half of the Governance Design Framework in figure
6-1 shows that, for the IT asset, enterprises harmonize IT organization
and desirable behaviors with their enterprise strategy and organiza-
tion. Enterprises harmonize their IY organizational structures with
their IT governance mechanisms—their decision-making structures,
alignment processes, and communications tools. Harmonization en-
sures that the mechanisms, IT unit structure, and desirable behaviors
result in governance arrangements that deliver on enterprise strategy.
Finally, 17 metrics and accountabilities define how IT will contribute to
enterprise performance goals and provide the means for separately
assessing IT effectiveness, Let’s look at the six components of effec-
tive governance design using JPMorgan Chase as an example.

Wernance, and Performance ag

FIGURE 6-1

Governance Design Framework

arrangements

| | teovernance ES
Entorprise strategy

Decision rights va Borers
sre erowiaton peste | peormane goals
it iF 4 iss
*|
FT governance Wmetrics end |

estabie aohavior

‘mechani vei
(Commitee, | | |

+ Prnepts
fo tAstiostire | |

| | Stntastctire | |
| pplestons /

> Harmonize wnat? Harmonize how?

£2005 MT Soe

Comer fo foion Syste Rasen (ISH, Used sth pom

JPMorgan Chase, with 2002 assets of $741 billion, competes in
five business segments: investment banking, investment manage-
ment and private banking, treasury and securities services, retail
and middle-market financial services, and private equity, J. Mor-
gan & Co, and the Chase Manhattan Bank Corporation merged
on December 31, 2000, the latest in a long line of mergers and
acquisitions of financial giants that included Chemical Bank, Man-
uiacturers Hanover, Texas Commerce Bank, Hambrecht & Quist,
and Flemings.

Enterprise Strategy and Organization

Like many diversified financial services firms, JPMorgan Chase had
traditionally managed with a high degree of autonomy among its
business units, By 2001, however, CEO William Hartison fr. had
shifted the business focus to “one firm—one team.” In the firm’s

--- PAGE 84 ---
150 IT GOVERNANCE

2002 annual report, he surnmarized JPMorgan Chase's strategy in
‘two principles:

+ Tobe a diversified financial services firm with a leadership
position in each of our businesses |

+ To provide our clients integrated solutions drawing on a
wide variety of products and services

ch business

Building and maintaining leadership positions in each of
JPMorgan Chase's diverse lines of business requires a relatively high
level of business unit autonomy. To provide integrated solutions,
however, means the firm must garner synergies at two levels: di-
visions and business units. To reflect the firm’s belief that most of
the strategy setting and execution for technology should reside in
the businesses, management developed an approach deemed the
“80/20 rule”: 80 percent of the work is done in the businesses and
20 percent is influenced centrally. Thus, 20 percent of IT efforts 2
should secure benefits from scale, simplicity, and integration across ie
the firm, The other 80 percent should continue to focus on adding
value to specific efforts of divisions and business units. | j
h

Fr matics
and accountabilities
1 "Steinkxe-grow” butt process

Business
perdormance gotie

"= Date mete fr each

fea. buy noida
iets mats

business unt

“+ New language and euture

1 cued numbar ef T pods

Figure 6-2 lists key elements of JPMorgan Chase's enterprise
strategy in the top left box. The strategy highlights JPMorgan Chase's ©
need for business unit autonomy with a concurrent effort to cut
costs and enable integration through business unit synergies.

Tor IT governance purposes, enterprise strategy is a set of clear, |
concise statements clarifying the enterprise's strategic intent. These
statements articulate an agreed-upon position that can be readily |
communicated, ‘The strategy focuses the attention of all employees ES
on simple and achievable messages, whether or not the employees
are part of the strategy-making process. Typically, statements of
strategy express one or more of the following:

TT governance

Lon Sytner {1S Use wth presi

perry

+ Competitive thrust of the enterprise

ince business unit

and organization

Enterprise strategy

+ Relationships among business units (for example, autonomy |
of business units versus specific types of synergies)

> reece wnat? fhe

+ Intentions for the role and management of information
and IT

-

Parts of an enterprise's strategy are effectively “hard-wired”
in the sense that they are built into the organization structure.

JPMorgan Chase's IT Governance

20s tT Sica Schl Carter er

--- PAGE 85 ---
182 IT GOVERNANCE

JPMorgan Chase has a distinctive structure bolstering the enter-
ptise’s goal of strony lines of business, ‘The five divisions all consist
of semiautonomous business units, The firm also has structures
supporting its goals for shared infrastructure and collaboration. For
example, division and business unit C1Os have a dual reporting
relationship to business management and to the head of technol-
ogy. The goal of governance design is to both reinforce and tran-
scend organization structure in defining responsibilities for imple
menting strategies,

IT Governance Arrangements

Governance arrangements identify the archetype used for each of
the I decisions. JPMorgan Chase's governance arrangements (sum-
marized in the top middle box of figure 6-2) reflect the demands of
the firm's strategy and organization. IT and business leaders jointly
define IT principles and make IT investment decisions. JPMorgan
Chase makes infrastructure and architecture decisions with a Tech-
nology Council made up of the diviston CIOs, the technology in-
frastcucture leaders, and the firm’s vice chairman for technology.
Business application decisions are decentralized to facilitate line-
of-business excellence, Within the lines of business, JPMorgan Chase
has implemented centers of excellence to facilitate shared projects
actoss business units.

TPMorgan Chase's decentralized structure fosters business unit
innovation and responsiveness, ‘The firm’s governance arrange-
ments for business applications reinforce its divisional and business
unit structures. At the same time, JPMorgan Chase's governance
amrangements for principles, architecture, infrasteucture, and in-
vestment all require collaboration across the business to define how
they can foster synergies across the enterprise. ‘These arrangements
transcend the formal organizational structure, JPMorgan Chase’s
combination of (1) relatively autonomous business units and (2) a
need for some synergies across business units, managed with (3)
decentralized IT applications decisions and (4) joint business and IT
leadership for enterprisewide decisions is what we mean by har-
monizing enterprise strategy and organization with IT governance
arrangements.

Linking Strategy, [PGovernance, and Performance 153

Business Performance Goals

The third component in the top half of the Governance Design
Framework in figure 6-2 is performance goals. Performance goals
establish clear objectives for the governing bodies and a benchmark
for assessing the success of governance efforts,

At JPMorgan Chase, each business unit determines business.
specific goals for T-enabled initiatives. The retail and middle-market
business, for example, is pursuing an E*l initiative—efficiency, ef
fectiveness, and innovation—which has led to specific goals of cost,
reductions and market leadership, Everyone at JPMorgan Chase,
however, shares in the goals of the “one firm—one team” philoso-
phy. Related performance goals include eliminating costs through.
the six sigma organizational quality program, developing a shared
language for IT initiatives, and improving results of customer reten-
tion and cross selling.

In the for-profit sector, enterprise performance goals such as
share price, profitability, and good citizenship are clear. Often, en-
terptises also specify antecedents of these endpoints to provide
more clarity and communication about desirable behaviors and
indicators of success, We will look at performance goills in the niot-
for-profit sector in Chapter 7.

IT Organization and Desirable Behaviors

‘he three components in the lower half of the Governance Design
Framework in figure 6-2 (1 siractuze and desitable behaviors, I gov-
emnanice mechanisms, and IY metrics and accountabilities) specify
how the top three components will be implement, Starting on the
lett, enterprise strategy and organization provides the direction for
TT structure and desirable behavior. Our definition of governance
specifying the decision rights and accountability framework to encourage
desiable beharior inthe use of IF—doesn’t mention strategy. Instex,
'we focus on desirable behaviors of the enterprise's people. Behaviors,
not strategy, create value. Behaviors are influenced by many factors,
such as incentives, culture, internal politics, and organizational his-
tory. But desirable behaviors must be in harmony with suategic
direction or an enterprise cannot achieve its performance goals.

--- PAGE 86 ---
154 IT GOVERNANCE

‘At JPMorgan Chase each business unit has an [T organization,
This structure facilitates the desirable IT behavior of focusing busi-
ness unit resources on developing and maintaining competitive
systems within their markets. But in addition to line-of-business
excellence, JPMorgan Chase strategy is concerned with economies
of scale, integrated solutions, and a “one firm—one team” culture.
Thus, JPMorgan Chase wants to stimulate new behaviors, encour-
aging collaboration across business units. Accordingly, the firm cre-
ated Enterprise Technology Services (ETS), a shared services organi-
zation for all technology infrastructure. ETS reports to the vice
chairman for technology, a member of the enterprisewide Execu-
tive Committee, In addition to structural change, JPMorgan Chase
has introduced governance mechanisms that clarify new desirable
behaviors and establish the means for reinforcing the behaviors. At
JPMorgan Chase, these new desirable behaviors include the use of
technology standards, centralized purchasing, and a standardized
project methodology.

IT Metrics and Accountabilities

IT desisable behaviors are reflected in the IT metrics and account-
abilities at the lower right of IPMorgan Chase's Governance Design
Framework (figure 6-2). Measurement and accountabilities are criti-
cal to any good governance design. Articulating who is responsible
for what and how they will be evaluated provides clarity, owner-
ship, and tools to assess governance performance.

In each of its business units JPMorgan Chase has individwal IT
metrics reflecting the impact of IT capabilities on the business.
Firmwide, JPMorgan Chase has I goals, such as a “shrink-to-grow"
budget process that seeks to cut costs through productivity and ef-
ficiency improvements in order to free up funds for new invest-
ments prioritized by business needs. Reduced operating costs, fewer
technology platforms, and certification for its standardized project,
management approach are among the other goals. Although IT suc-
cess must ultimately be reflected in business success, these interme-
diate, function-specific metrics focus JPMorgan Chase's IT efforts
and help gauge progress of the IT unit in its ability to contribute to
the business.

Linking Strategy, IT Governance, ancl Performance 155

IT Governance Mechanisms

Well-designed mechanisms convert IT desirable behaviors into the
outcomes listed in the Governance Design Framework. Only a few
managers see the Governance Design Framework, but most man-
agers interact with one or more of the mechanisms daily. Some
mechanisms deal mainly with one decision (for example, the archi-
tecture committee makes architecture decisions), while others deal
with several or all five decisions (for example, the executive com-
mittee makes principles decisions and certain investment deci
sions). Well-designed mechanisms reinforce and encourage desit-
able behaviors and lead to outcomes specified in the IT metrics and
accountabilities.

At the core of JPMorgan Chase's IT governance is a five-member
Technology Executive Committee—a subgroup of the company’s Ex-
ecutive Committee. The members of the subgroup are the top line-
of-business executives and the head of technology. ‘The decision-
making team entrusted with IT principles and investment decisions
consists of this committee and JPMorgan Chase's ‘Technology
Council.

The Technology Council brings together the division ClOs and
infrastructure leaders from Enterprise Technology Services. Defin-
ing principles and making investment decisions with the Executive
Committee is only one of the Technology Council's charges. Be-
cause the Council comprises the firm’s technology leaders, it has
the expertise and authority to make firmwide architecture and
infrastructure decisions. The Council relies on six subcommittees
for input into its decisions: Architecture Board, Engineering Board,
Financial Performance, People, Strategic Relationships, and Com-
munications. Each subcommittee is headed by a Council member
and has representatives from both business unit and corporate IT.

At JPMorgan Chase the Engineering Board has proved to be
a key mechanism for implementing the whole-of-enterprise ap-
proach to leveraging the firm’s scale. The Board's brief is to force
greater simplicity in product choices and lay the foundations for
greater integration of systems and processes across the enterprise,
JPMorgan Chase's history of acquisitions, coupled with its autono-
mous business unit decision-making model, resulted in nearly two

--- PAGE 87 ---
1s IT GOVERNANCE

thousand different infrastructure products across the firm. ‘The
Engineering Board analyzed each product and put it into one of
three categories: buy, hold, or sell. Through these efforts, the Engi-
neering Board reduced the firm’s technology product sel to 130
component areas with about three hundred product choices. Thus,
this governance mechanism has translated desicable behaviors of a
simpler architecture and technical standards to a performance out-
come—reducing the technical product set. Two other governance
mechanisms, the Executive Committee and the Technology Coun-
Gil, are promulgating the buy-hold-sell concept across the firm, fun-
damentally changing technology procurement.

A new exceptions process complements JPMorgan Chase's new
discipline in technology procurement. A business or IT professional
seeking an exception must present a strong, quantitatively sound
business case for any nonstandard technology. “Everyone knows
now that you ate dealing with seasoned executives who will ask
‘the hard questions,” according to the manager of the Engineering
Board.* The Board provides a clear, public explanation for every re-
jected case. This transparency in the decision-making process has
reduced the negative impact of the new controls and helped make
“puy-hold-sel!" part of the business vocabulary for IT

‘Another key governance mechanism for achieving JPMorgan
Chase's perlormance goals is the firmn’s six sigma methodology. Six
sigma is central to JPMorgan Chase's firmwide productivity and
quality improvement efforts. The director of the six sigma program
isa member of the Technology Council. This arrangement firmly es-
tablishes the linkage between productivity improvement efforts and
the IT investment process. All the firm's divisions and business units
have adopted six sigma, enhancing JPMorgan Chase's capability to
develop both business unit excellence and firmwide synergies.

The product and price guide and business chargeback are a final
mechanism supporting JPMorgan Chase’s evolution from a busi-
ness unit focus to a “one firm—one team” focus. [PMargan Chase’s
product andl price guide identifies costs for shared IT services, The
business chargeback aims to recover ETS costs, ETS intends for the
product and price guide to provide the lines of business with a tool
for making more informed TI’ decisions. With the product and price
guide, ETS exposes its costs to the business units. So the business

Linking Strategy, IT Governance, and Peréormance 157

units can see savings from consolidating IT operations (such as data
centers, networks, common desktops) and from annual productiv-
ity gains, Thus, the product and price guide and business charge-
back encourage desirable behaviors and lead to the cost reductions
‘targeted in JPMorgan Chase's IT metrics

Risks of IT Governance Designs

JPMorgan Chase's integrated and disciplined approach to IT gover-
nance has started to have a noticeable impact on the firm's new
whole-of-enterprise thrust. ‘The head of the Engineering Board
notes that the firm has made significant progress in achieving IT
metrics: “Purchasing of nonapproved products has now virtually”
stopped. We are all operating from the same playbook, We are
reducing the level of complexity, dealing with vendors differently,
and starting to see real teamwork across all our businesses." As
expected, these benefits are starting to flow to business results
Every governance arrangement carries risks. Decisions by UT
leaders risk resistance from business managers. Joint business/IT
decisions can lead to large and unwieldy decision-making bodies.
Decentralized application decisions risk deterioration of firmwide
standards and goals. JPMorgan Chase has countered the risks of
its governance design in several ways. First, [7 decisions are im-
plemented by corporate and business unit IT leaders. The composi
tion of this mechanism ensures that decisions represent business
unit needs as well as enterprise needs, But TT decisions are also
guided by enterprise objectives, that is, economies of scale and &
“one firm—one team” culture, Second, senior managers at the divi-
sion and line-of-business levels approve their respective IT strate-
gies. These strategies provide input to the principles and invest-
ment decisions for the enterprise. ‘Third, performance goals call-
ing for cost savings and business integration motivate adoption of
shared infrastructure and architecture standards, Corporate in-
centive systems motivate divisional and business unit managers
to pursue fmvvide synergies. Fourth, although business units take
individual responsibility for application needs decisions, they must
comply with enterprise buy-hold-sell guidelines, And coordina-
tion of application development at the division level limits the

--- PAGE 88 ---
158 IT GOVERNANCE

autonomy of project managers. Without this kind of harmony
among the components of the Governance Design Framework,
JPMorgan Chase would probably fail in its efforts to implement
technology standards and shared services. And without technology
standards and shared services, JPMorgan Chase would jeopardize
ils chances of achieving any kind of synergies across business units.

Designing IT Governance for Different
Strategic and Structural Drivers

Although effective IT governance requires harmonization of all
six components of the Governance Design Framework, enterprise
strategy and organization sets the direction. ‘Thus, we can under
stand alternative governance designs by focusing on alternative
business strategies and organization designs. In this section we re-
view Une governance design of firms pursuing different strategies
as distinguished by Treacy and Wiersema’s concept of value dis-
ciplines (sce endnote 1), We then review two broad alternative
orginivational designs: business unit synergy and business unit
autonomy. For each alternative, we deseribe key influences on I
governance design

IU Governance for Different Strategies:
Value Disciplines

Along with many executives, we have found the concept of value
disciplines useful in highlighting implications of different strate-
gies for IT governance. Successlul organizations, the “market lead-
ers” according to Treacy and Wiersema, usually excel at delivering,
one type of business value to their chosen customers.

The three value disciplines are:

+ Operational Excellence, where businesses emphasize efficiency
and reliability, lead the industry in price and convenience,
minimize overhead costs, streamline the supply chain

+ Customer fatimacy, focusing on the cultivation of relation-
ships, lifetime value to the company, customer service, and
responsiveness and customization based on deep customer
knowledge

Linking Stategy, IT Governance, and Pesformance 159

+ Product (or Service) Leadership, with continuing product inno-
vation, the embracing of ideas, new solutions to problems,
and rapid commercialization

Market leaders excel in at least one value discipline while meet-
ing a minimum threshold of competence in the other two, Bach of
the three value disciplines has different rules and norms, organiza
tion and skills sets, and management systems (figure 6-3)

Operational Excelence

In our stucly, enterprises focused on operational excellence had
larger increases in asset utilization (ROA—sce figure 6-3). This te
lationship reflects harmony between a strategy emphasizing effi-
ciency and celiability and a performance goal emphasizing effective
use of assets. Operationally excellent enterprises are process driven,
most notably focused on end-to-end supply chain optimization
‘These enterprises tend to have centralized management structures
designing standardized enterprise-wide processes to minimize coor-
dination costs, Standard operating procedures and business pro-
cesses ate finely honed! over the years and embedded in the eniter-
prise’s information systems. Operationally excellent firms rarely
encourage local innovation, relying instead on designing and dif-
fusing innovations from the center outward. Senior managers and
corporate staffs make most strategic decisions in operationally ex-
cellent enterprises.

Examples of operationally excellent firms include (1) UPS,
whose industrial engineering tradition delivers continuous produc-
tivity improvements; (2) MeadWestvaco, a manufacturer of com-
modity paper products, which competes on price, quality, and reli-
ability; (3) BIC Graphic Europe, a small manufacturer of branded
Promotional products (for example, pens with a company logo)
whose success depends on high quality, low price, and a strong dis-
tribution network; and (4) ING Direct, a bank that offers lower fees
and higher interest rates through standardized, low-cost services.
Although all these firms also work to enhance customer service and
product and service innovation, they succeed in their markets fist
and foremost because of their operational excellence.

The IT capabilities of operationally excellent firms reflect their
strategic emphasis. I is highly centralized, designed to enable

--- PAGE 89 ---
Linking Strates

TT Governatice, co

| le | \s| high-volume, low-cost transaction processing. More important,
5 aE eg \B8l | process design is built into systems. Thus, systems play a key role
25/3 lek) | in ensuring the reliability and predictability of business processes.
Ea a eal is y and pr y P
| a 3 2 38 (ge) | MeadWestvaco and BIC Graphic Furope establish the process:
| i. le |4e a9 Ly systems link through purchased ERPs. UPS builds systems in house
| ey ee ee gel | ae onverge on asingle-package database, protecting the inegrty
85 Bee and reliability of both the data and the product delivery process,
| aus Bee lee [eel | . , B YP
BEE age 5 53 ING Direct eelies on reuse of standard application modules,
BE aug 33] PP
| Bes if a |. lee | the centralized management style and process standardization

| role of systems gives operationally excellent firms some common It
| | i tal governance requirements. Typically these fitms have highly stan-
| Sardized architectures and a thick layer of shared infrastructure

o

2%
4 H 2
| ee [RUE |E 5 i,t \t Operationally excellent enterprises allow few exceptions to stan-
Wb ie 34 i pypd | | duads because exceptions introduce ackled TT operations costs, They
| Be al i yaa | i | ae | i | “lemand broad acceptance of strategies, standards, and metrics to
8 Syitkas |§ \S gel, [4 ensure consistent processes, Ancl they tightly align business pro-
laeedlisas |ige |3 i p y Us Pi
;  ElbveelRREE Tas Vageuie 131 saa ih their standard, enterpriseside applications. Oper
| Se bak |gheke | fy tionally excellent firms need simple low-cost governance arrange-
| 4 aaclebs leagsie | a] y P 8 a
(28s 5 a é ments to support their efficient business models. Top performers
| SHEESH) GES joSE5)E | 7 PI
ie yl harmonize the six components of IT governance to facilitate ¢r0ss-
| | | | : | functional, cross-business-unit processes,
é \ \
| a | 4 | 4 [8 Operational Excellence at ING Direct. ING Direct is the intet-
. 4 ig 13 perational Excellence «i ect. ING Direct is the inter
| § oe |eby |, i ‘2 | I rational direct banking unit of the Dutch financial services conglom-
| 4 ge jerk jee jg 14) rae ING, created in. 1997, ING Ditect offers simple, transparent
5 seolaie lite |) 2 thank products through nnuitipé channels By May 2008, ING Diect
SeElaee ieee jb | p igh mmultip yy May
3 eeelbee |e ig lal hhad assets of 78 billion euros and served over 6 million customers
| 3 fey el fee bar 3 (by ING Direct's no/low fees, high returns, and multiple channels appeal
| é soe deo PEP al to affiuent, technology-savvy personal banking customers. Between
] 2001 and 2003, the firm won numerous marketing and banking
‘nmovation awards in Europe, the United States, and Australia
] ] _— | TMG Direct is organized into eight countiy-hased businesses
ig \3 \gse/) 2 | gach country unit operates autonomously, but the units share a
H z Seq | ee common, “standardized” business model. The bank leverages stare
\8 je 2385|8% D 8
g 5 | E222) se | dardized business solutions as well as standardized technical and
ia 18 esaglae | aremeuceare components in offering a product set featuring sav-
\g 5 £352 lee | ings accounts, term deposits, personal Loans/mortgages, retirement
ia 16 S5sh/EE | savings plans, and a few selected mutual funds,

--- PAGE 90 ---
162 IT GOVERNANCE

ING Direct's Information ‘Technology and Operations Council
(C1Os and COOs of the country businesses with the head office CIO.
and COO) makes enterprisewide principles, architecture, infrastruc-
ture, and investment decisions (figure 6-4). The Council structure
facilitates sharing of best practice and alignment between opera-
tions and information technology. ‘The Council holds semiannual
‘meetings in which the C1Os meet on Monday, the COOs meet on
‘Thursday, and the two groups meet jointly on ‘Tuesday and Wed-
nesday. These meetings offer a forum for coordinating the IT Plan
with the businesses’ Mid Term Plan. The outcome of the meeting.
serves as input for the ING Direct Council, where the international
business strategy is discussed and defined. In doing so, ING Direct
allows IT capabilities to influence business strategy just as strategy
influences IT.

Unlike many operationally excellent firms, ING Direct looks to
its local businesses for innovations. As a country plans to introduce
a new product, a product proposél detailing financial and business
implications and risks is first discussed by the Product Committee
at ING Direct's head office, IT applications are then selected based
on a thorough and detailed RFI/REP process involving all business
units. The outcome of this selection process is a global standard
rather than an isolated local solution. In addition, the chief archi-
tect helps define application specifications so that the new applica-
tion modules work effectively with existing modules and fit with
ING Direct's business, application, and technical architecture,

This arrangement supports ING Direct’s desirable behaviors of
building modules for reuse, standardizing applications, and achiev-
ing a universally compatible architecture, Moreover, it allows for
global reusability of expert knowledge through shared and stan-
dardized business solutions and architectures, The benefits of mod-
ule reuse were apparent during the recent launch of ING Direct UK
where, besides the head office implementation team, staff from six
ING Direct business units contributed.

Customer Intimacy

Customer-intimate firms emphasize flexibility and responsive:
ness in customer service and marketplace management, Customer
intimacy strategies are consistent with performance goals focused

ING Direct’s Governance

Business

performance goals

ge

i
i

rtoay

Entororiso

‘and organization
visi nan
‘trough ruta

i

1 Eipane inte ne counties

= Irprnoges|
1 Architect

any consumes

1 instars strategies

+ Russ experioe though

standardize, snared processes

Fi metros
‘and accountabilities

governance
mech

Tr organiza

and desirable behavior

z
z
3

--- PAGE 91 ---
164 IT GOVERNANCE

on high profitability (see figure 6-3). Customer-intimate firms
require the ability to identify valuable customers and nurture
those relationships. Accurately recognizing and developing valu-
able customer relationships demands a good understanding of both
customers and costs. Customer-intimate firms can achieve prof-
itability goals by customizing solutions for individual customers oF
by identifying discrete customer segments and developing tailored
products to serve them. Success in customizing solutions depends
‘on highly capable and empowered employees at the customer
interface. Successfully identifying and serving discrete segments de-
pends on powerful data-based systems exposing the segments

Examples of customer-intimate firms include (1) Federal Ex-
press, which takes on the expense of customized services to meet
the unique needs of its customers; (2) USA, a diversified financial
services firm focused on serving the financial needs of military per-
sonnel and their families; (3) Capital One, a credit card company:
that segments existing and potential customers into highly specific
character sets; and (4) Panalpina, which provides customized
{reight-forwarding solutions through standardized processes. These
firms work hard to cut unnecessary costs while developing innova-
tive products and services. Their competitive edge, however, is in
knowing their customers and responding to their customers’ spe-
clalized needs.

The information and IT requirements of customer-intimate
firms center on understanding and serving customers. Customer-
intimate firms often strive for a single view of the customer, requir-
ing well-designed and accessible data. Standardized data definitions
and naming conventions are critical. USA, Panalpina, and many
other customer-intimate firms are implementing customer relation-
ship management systems to support data standardization and
related business processes. Customer intimacy often requires recog-
nizing high-value customers. Analytical tools can expose cclation-
ships with the greatest lifetime value and identify life events (lor
example, sending a child away to college) or support cross selling.
Capital One has achieved significant competitive advantage from
analytical models that identify demographic segments with unique
credit card needs.”

Linking Strategy, IT’ Governance, and Performance 165

IT governance at customer-intimate enterprises requires clarify-
ing desirable behavior regarding responsiveness to customer needs.
IT principles should clarify where IT will support individual disere-
tion—and the limits of the discretion—and where IT should sup-
port standard processes to provide predictable, cost-effective solu-
tions. To support customer responsiveness, IT governance should
clarify responsibility for stewardship of customer data, IT must
accept some responsibility for integrating data, but a single view of
the customer relies on consistent data definitions and business
processes across the enterprise, Just as the CFO owns the financial
data in most firms, enterprises need data stewards who own cu:
tomer data. Customer-intimate enterprises need governance mech-
anisms that maintain global consistency in the management and
use of customer data and interactions, Finally, IT governance mech-
anisms at customer-intimate firms should clarify responsibility for
innovations in customer service and customer s¢

mentation,

Customer Intimacy at Panalpina, Based in Basel, Switzerland,
Panalpina focuses on intercontinental air and sea freight services
Panalpina owns no shipping assets but works with transportation
companies to meet the end-to-end shipping needs of its global cu:
tomers. With revenues of approximately U.S, $3.5 billion, Panal-
pina is one of the world’s largest freight forwarders. The company.
organizes its twelve thousand people into three hundred twenty
“houses,” each with specific geographical responsibilities. Panal-
pina’s customers can be cost sensitive, but they have varied and
often complex shipping requirements. The company’s strategy is to
provide customized, integrated solutions while minimizing the pre-
mium customers must pay for those services. Thus, Panalpina’s 1°
governance focuses on facilitating customization while minimizing,
nonvalue-added operating costs (figure 6-5).

Panalpina’s governance arrangements involve close working re-
Lationships between business and IT managers, The Executive Board

acts as a global steering committee making principles and
ment de

vest:
jons. The CIO sits on the Executive Board and has re-
sponsibility for both IT and process development. The operational
head of IT is one of the CIO's direct reports. Her other three direct

--- PAGE 92 ---
FiURE 0-5

ina’s IT Governance

[

Panal

3
a
ge
z
a

A

+ Proice bal customers

1 Reduce cost

Business monarchy decides

re

Yorprise strategy

‘and organization

‘tegntsvcos

i

+ Provide

i

03

Duopoly decides

rs

anced scares

+ KPlon servos

to monnectus

TT govern
‘mechanism

singiseign-on

IT imparts
esse charge

+ Proce seeing con

son Serle er Infomation Syst Ao

200s rs

Linking Strateyy, IT Governance, and Performance le?

reports head information management, business development, and
Project management, The CIO and her direct reports are respon-
sible for architecture, infrastructure, and applications decisions.

To provide integrated end-to-end customer solutions, Panal-
pina needs high levels of coordination across its 320 houses. Cen-
tralizing both IT and process development under the CIO facilitates
this coordination and ensures alignment between IT and business
strategy. The CIO organizes around projects, drawing process and.
IT expertise from her staff while securing business expertise from
the field. Major projects have steering committees of IT and busi-
ness managers. This structure has facilitated implementation of
enterprise systems to support standardization of core processes.
Panalpina has both technical and process standards. By centraliz-
ing process and IT management, Panalpina is able to empower
employees to develop customized solutions within the constraints
of the standards, Panalpinia can therefore deliver customized solue
tions reliably and cost effectively.

Although Panalpina’s centralized IT organization facilitates pro-

» and technical standardization, it complicates IT support, Reli-
able service and support is critical to maintaining constant elec
tronic linkages to customers and business partners. Rather than
locate significant IT expertise at each of the 320 houses, Panalpina
has distributed some IP professionals in the houses while building
substantial support into regional centers, Ensuring adequate sup-
port involves designing processes to dixect calls from computer
users to appropriate technical experts, ‘The CIO has introduced per-
formance metrics to monitor that service.

Asa logistics firm, Panalpina’s largest capital expenditures are
for information technology. The firm’s governance arrangements
helped the firm realize a small increase in net income in 2002
despite a slow economy. Tight ITYbusiness coordination led to
reduced operating costs despite aggressive growth efforts (approxi
mately four hundred additional positions in regions with the great-
est growth potential) and a transformation from the firm's tradi-
tional local structure to a regional organization structure.

Customer intimacy is a more complex strategy than opera-
tional excellence, Checks and balances are needed to cnsure that,
in addressing complex customer needs, the firm enhances, rather

--- PAGE 93 ---
168, IT GOVERNANCE

than jeopardizes, profitability. Panalpina’s IT governance relies on.
centralized IT management and business monarchy and duopoly
governance arrangements to monitor these dual requirements. Some
customer-intimate firms prefer more decentralized organizational
structures, To compensate, they typically govern with strong busi-
ness and IT monarchies to define and enforce shared technology,
business processes, and data definitions. The State Street case at the
end of the chapter provides an example of this alternative gover
nance design,

Product Leadership

Fiems leading on product or service offerings are focused on
product development and time to market, emphasizing constant
innovation or breakthrough products, Enterprises in our study with
strategies focused on product leadership had faster increases in
market capitalization (see figure 6-3). Product leadership firms fos-
ter innovation by creating productive R&D environments, charac-
terized by knowledge sharing, the freedom to experiment, and
organic cells of technical experts. Management practices in product
leadership firms focus on encouraging and rewarding innovation
while managing the inherent risks of experimentation. Revenue
growth [rom innovation requires success; experimentation in-
evitably involves some failures. Management focuses on ensuring
the right balance of risk taking and control

Examples of product leadership firms include (1) DuPont, grow-
ing through innovation in its global product fines; (2) Pfizer, en-
abling innovation by separating pharmaceutical R&D into a sepa-
rate business unit; and (3) Motorola, designing powerful software
for telecommunications and other electronic products. ‘These firms
cannot ignore requirements for efficiency or customer responsive-
ness, but their strategies focus first on designing new products and
services,

The information needs of product leadership firms revolve
around generating and disseminating knowledge about innov:
tions. In core R&D shops, this involves experimentation—increas-
ingly computer simulated—to test compounds and analyze results.
Service innovations require customer testing through usability labs
or test marketing. For both product and service innovations, IT
requirements include collaborative tools for sharing knowledge

Linking Stra

IT Governance, and Performance 169

across (Increasingly virtual) teams and modeling tools for actually

conducting the experiments. In addition to research support
Product leadership firms need technology supporting rapid, cost.
effective commercialization of new products, Thus, although the
research function of a product leadership enterprise requires an
organic environment focused on knowledge sharing, ather units in
the same firm have needs more similar to operationally excellent or
customer-intimate enterprises

IP governance for product leadership addresses the many faces
of a firm encouraging innovation but also attempting to thrive in
markets where customers negotiate prices and demand firsLerate
Customer service. Because different functional and organizational
units have different needs, governance focuses on clarifying what
will be shared across organizational units and how those units will
interface. To enable innovation, a product leader's IT governance
encourages some autonomy in the applications of innovating
units. At DuPont and Pfizer, governance involves feudal arrange.
ments for IT application needs.

Product leaders also require efficiencies in IT operations, so
they create shared infrastructures and design enterprise architec-
tures, DuPont and Pfizer rely on IT monarchies to design and im-
plement shared infrastructures. The IT monarchies primarily com.
prise business unit IT staff and thus achieve the benefits of a federal
‘arrangement. IT stalf explore the capabilities of existing technolo-
gies as they debate the compromises required of individual business
units in adopting shared standards and services. These IT monar-
chies are empowered by business leaders who are actively involved
in principles and investment decisions.

JPMorgan Chase's IT governance design framework in figure 6-2
offers an example of governance design with a product leadership
flavor while balancing the need for the other value disciplines. The
emphasis on empowering innovators while developing platforms
to enable effective delivery of products and services is a constant
theme in product leadership firms. Duopolies are useful for ensur-
ing that IT provides the right balance of business unit and enter-
prisewide support. In chapter 3 we described Motorola's gover-
nance design. Despite their very different industries, the similarities
in the desirable behaviors of JPMorgan Chase and Motorola lead to
similar governance designs.

--- PAGE 94 ---
170 fT GOVERNANCE

All firms, regardless of discipline, share the need for IT gover-
nance to both reinforce and transcend organizational stcucture. In
the next section we explore how firms coordinate the IT needs of
their business units.

Encouraging Business Unit Synergies
or Autonomy with IT Governance

A key strategic decision for multibusiness unit enterprises is how to
structure business unit relationships. Enterprises in our study had
an average of eight independent business units. Over 83 percent of
enterprises described significant pressure to capture synergies
between their business units, At the same time, over 0 percent of
enterprises had significant pressure for autonomy between business
units, Forty-seven percent of firms felt significant pressure for both.
synergies and autonomy. Requirements for synergies across organi-
zational boundaries expose the limitations of organizational struc-
tures in facilitating business strategy. A critical role of IT gover-
nance is to ensure that organizational boundaries do not constrain
strategic objectives.

Despite the desire to develop both autonomy and synergy
across business units, we find that more successful enterprises de-
cide which is more important—synergy or autonomy. The answer
to this question leads to one of two types of governance objectives:
encouraging business unit autonomy with some synergies or en-
couraging business unit synergies with some autonomy. Figure 6-6
defines these arrangements and lists their management implica-
tions, drawing out the differences on four dimensions.>

In chapter 2 we noted that enterprise architectures attempt to
capture three types of standardization: technology, data, and pro-
cess, Not coincidentally, these three types of standardization reflect,
the synergies enterprises seek:

1: Shared technology and infrastructure services to generate
economies of scale

2. Shared data, particularly customer, supplier, product, or
employee data to facilitate process integration

3. Standardized processes to facilitate process excellence,
reusability, and organizational learning

Linking Strategy, T'Governance, and Performance real

FIGURE 6-6

Business Unit Arrangements

Key strarecic oniven

BU Synergy BU Autonomy

+ Some processes standard + Each SU's processes are
cross several BUS distinct and indopendent

+ Some processes inte +
-mphasis on BU decision
‘Fated across several BUS making

: + Tep-down leaders :
and skits a Enocurage BU imovative
speciying synergies, capacity
+ Remove dupteation + BU skis focused on focal
—_ value deci
Management stems > —
Management sy ‘Snore contra + Few mandated processes

or cooraia eines andcootiaied + Enron arcana
(©, incentives and IT Bustocweson meh mm ied

& nee risk managomen
ehitectures) and fence strategy cial

Informationand ea thn arn:

ation *'Substaniaintoorated —__« Thin ayer of fimwige
Information systems" rmgiie infusions infrastructure

and shared eences + Each 8U inrastustare

_ = and systems tailored
Our study Higher profit (Ron)

Larger increases in
market cap and revenue
growth

{© 20:3 0 Scan Solel Corte fr tamation Systems Hessarh (SA. Used ath peneson,

We have found that enterprises that encourage business unit
autonomy with some synergies usually focus on shared technology
and infrastructure services (number 1 in the list). These synergies
Offer significant efficiencies without forcing difficult business unit
integration, which is often perceived as meddling by business unit
leaders. In contrast, enterprises pursuing business unit synergies

with some autonomy may gradually work toward developing all
three of the synergies.

Encouraging Business Unit Autonomy
with Some Synergies

When enterprises want diverse business units to pursue world:
class excellence in their specific market or function, they may choose
to minimize potential synergies. Their opportunities for synergies

--- PAGE 95 ---
172 IT GOVERNANCE

are likely to be limited, and the costs and burdens of achieving syn-
exgies may be outweighed by the potential for growth from inde-
pendent business units. Our study provides support for this ap-
proach. Firms secking business unit autonomy had higher growth
rates in their industry-adjusted market capitalization and revenues
with some weak evidence of lower profits

To achieve growth, as well as better margins and asset utiliza-
tion, many firms choose a predominantly autonomous business
model but still strive for synergies by removing duplication and
achieving economies. For many years Pfizer, now the world’s largest
and most valuable pharmaceutical company, managed its business
units autonomously.* The two largest business units, Global Re-
search and Development and Global Pharmaceuticals, have many
different but some similar information and application needs. Pfizer
has encouraged both to pursue world-class capabilities in their re-
spective functions. These two business units, as well as Pfizer's four
smaller business units, have their own IT groups and generally
address their own information needs. Because the company has
grown rapidly and because the IT groups want to focus their staff
on the high-value IT projects, Pfizer has seen value in developing
shared services, initially in the area of IT infrastructure, manage-
ment of enterprisewide data, and enterprisewide applications like
human resources and finance. These shared services capitalize on
potential synergies, most notably economies of scale and the elimi-
nation of duplicate, nondifferentiating services.

To support efforts to capture synergies among business units,
Pfizer's management has created IT governance processes. These
processes provide a forum for negotiating what can and should be
shared, what enterprisewide projects should be undertaken, and
how shared resources will be managed. Pfizer created an IT Leader-
ship Team (ITLT) composed of the vice presidents of Information
‘Technology in the six businesses, as well as the vice president of the
Corporate Information ‘Technology Group, who chairs the ITLT
and has responsibility for building and running the IT infrastruc
ture, The ITLT develops an integrated plan and seeks to share a
‘common set of high-level metrics, The ITLT reports to an Informa-
tion Technology Planning Group (I1PG) that comprises senior busi-
ness function heads. This team determines priorities for shared

Linking States

IT Governance, and Performance 173

Processes, infrastructure, and applications at Pfizer. Each team mem-

ber assigned a senior staffer to participate in Pfizer's Architecture
Council. The Architecture Council designed an enterprise architec-
ture, agreed on technology standards, and developed the enterprise
Project portfolio for approval by the ITLT. On major projects, an
TILT sponsor then provides high-level guidance to the corporate IT
engineering and operations groups, which implement the new
services. In addition to these decision mechanisms, Pfizer intro-
duced an architecture exception process, with the Architecture
Council making decisions on requested exceptions,

Pfizer has developed an IT prioritization and funding process
mechanism to guide the decisions of the IT Leadership Team. We
have observed that, like Pfizer, as firms start to seek out synergies,
they design IT governance to create those synergies. Plizer still
encourages high levels of business unit autonomy in order to pur-
sue world-class competencies. The firm’s IT governance supports its
efforts to garner synergies where it makes sense,

Enterprises like Pfizer with predominately autonomous busi-
ness units but seeking some synergies do need IT governance. But it
is governance “light.” The light IT governance encourages syner-
ies in enterprise processes, enterprise applications, and technical
infrastructure without slowing or retarding business unit inno-
vation. The synergies create efficiencies, thereby enhan:
itability, while business unit autonomy enables growth.

1 Prof

Encouraging Business Unit Synergies
with Some Autonomy

While Pfizer continues to encourage business unit autonomy
on many IT decisions, other enterprises sacrifice business unit
autonomy to gain greater synergies. In our study, enterprises citing
high pressure for achieving synergies had higher profits as meas-
ured by ROI. But capitalizing on potential synergies is not easy. Or-
Banizational boundaries usually cause resistance to any kind of
sharing, integrating, or standardizing. Business units argue that
“we are different” or “you folks at corporate always sow us down
with your bureaucratic procedures.” In addition, pursuing synergies
introduces coordination costs. Governance is a cost-effective way
to manage coordination.

--- PAGE 96 ---
174 IT GOVERNANCE

‘The experiences of MeadWestvaco, Panalpina, Dow Corning,
UPS, Delta Air Lines, and other firms suggest that both the number
of mechanisms and the number of people involved in IT gover-
nance expands as firms pursue technology, data, and process syner-
gies. Without an overwhelming strategic logic, the natural auton-
omy of business units will prevail. Thus, firms pursuing synergies
need senior business executives and business unit heads to make
critical decisions, communicate their intentions, and ensure effec-
tive implementation.

The mechanisms of IT architecture committees and chargeback
were often used effectively by top-performing firms to facilitate
synergies. While many firms struggle to deploy these two mecha-
nisms effectively, firms successfully seeking synergies reported that
both mechanisms were effective and worked well together. As we
saw at Pfizer, IT architecture committees with representatives from
the different business units plot a course for IT use by designing
and communicating the enterprise architecture. The architecture
committee provides the vision for the use of IT and illustrates
how business unit synergies will be achieved. A “big picture” archi.
tecture illustrating how all the pieces fit together, as in the Delta
Nervous System (see figure 2-5), is a very powerful communica
tion tool.

Chargeback adds order to the architecture vision and is used for

‘two purposes. First, chargeback makes clear the cost savings from
the shared services model. Transparent chargeback can defuse argu-
ments about transfer pricing by demonstrating the value of shared
services. Second, chargeback encourages responsible use of IT con-
sistent with the synergy strategy. Chargeback encourages business
unit managers who are accountable for both local and global re-
sults to use shared services, such as an enterprisewide customer
database. In summary, the architecture committee sets the direc
tion and the chargeback system takes care of the money flow while
encouraging responsible IT use.

Summary of the Strategy-Governance Relationship

Business unit arrangements—by reflecting business strategy—have
important implications for IT governance. At one end of the spec-

Linking Strategy, IT Governance, and Performance 47s

trum, enterprises consisting of autonomous business units with few

requirements for synergies across those business units have little, if
any, need for IT governance. Only if business units share some
resources—shared infrastructure services, an enterprisewide IT
budget, common data—should they govern IT. The demand for
synergies aligns somewhat with the value disciplines—product lead-
ers most often demanding only technology synergies, customer-
intimate firms often seeking shared data in addition to the
economies of scale characteristic of technology synergies, and op-
crationally excellent firms finding value in process standardization,
as well as technology and data synergies.

As firms introduce synergies focused on shared and standard-
ized technology, they must govern architecture and infrastructure
at the enterprise level. Thus, they start to introduce some gover-
ance mechanisms. Firms seeking data and process synergies add
more governance mechanisms to ensure the integrity of data and
to design and implement global processes, ‘Technology standards
require the support of business leaders, but data and process stan
dards force the active leadership of business executives,

These escalating governance requirements suggest that IT gov-
emance evolves in enterprises. Throughout this book we have ob-
served that firms such as Panalpina, Pfizer, MeadWestvaco, Camp-
bell Soup, JPMorgan Chase, DuPont, Carlson Companies, and DBS
Bank are generally moving from more autonomous to more syner-
sistic organizational designs. As firms evolve toward more synergis-
tic designs, they adopt more complex IT governance. The State
Street Corporation case study describes one company’s IT gover-
nance evolution from minimal governance mechanisms to govern-

ing technology synergies and then introducing customer process
and data synergies.

Case Study on State Street Corporation:
Changing Strategic Objectives

To better understand the complexities of IT governance, we look int
detail at IT governance at State Street Corporation, one of America’s
best-performing financial services firms. To capture the evolution
of IT governance, the case study spans more than three years and

--- PAGE 97 ---
176 IY GOVERNANCE

includes two C1Os."° The case demonstrates how IT governance can
be used fo help implement significant strategic change,

A Top-Performing Financial Services Firm

State Street Corporation is a world leader in financial services, pro-
viding investment services, investment management, trading, and
research to investment managers, corporations, mutual funds, pen-
sion funds, unions, not-for-profit organizations, and individuals.
As of March 2003, State Street had $7.9 trillion in assets under cus-
tody and $788 billion in assets under management; more than
20,000 employees worked in 22 countries serving clients in over
100 markets. Annual growth rates in both revenues and net income
increased on average at more than 15 percent annually from 1996
to 2002. Operating earnings per share experienced over 16 percent
compounded growth in the ten years up to and including 2002. In.
2002, State Street had total revenues of nearly $4 billion and net
income of $719 million, In 2002, annual revenue growth was flat,
consistent with the industry downturn, although net income grew:
S percent.

State Street is the world’s number one player in each of the
following markets: investment servicing, institutional investment
management, securities lending, and foreign exchange services.
Globally, State Street is one of the leading users and developers of
IY, committing on average 20 to 25 percent of operating expenses
to technology and technologists. Trademarked information deliv-
ery systems, such as State Street’s Global Link and In-Sight, and
electronic trading platforms, such as EX Connect, Lattice, and
Equity Connect, provide clients with critical financial systems.
Computerworld magazine regularly votes State Street one of the top
twenty places to work in IT. Reflecting on the importance of TT,
Marshall Carter, former CEO of State Street, often referred to State
Street as a technology company with a banking license."

When David Spina became Chaitman and CEO of State Street
in January 2001, the world’s stock markets were in a prolonged
slump and a series of structural changes were occurring in State
Street's core markets. These changes led State Street to focus on
achieving greater returns [rom all assets and particularly from the I"
investments that were crucial to State Street's leadership position.

Linking Strategy, (T Governance, and Performance 197

The structural changes included the impact of the aging popu
ation on pension systems, Because people were living longer, po
icy makers were looking for ways to help individuals build suitable
savings to fund their retirements. Governments would need pen-
sion fund management services from financial institutions, ‘The
aging population, along with incteased use of the Internet in the
Provisioning of financial services, represented a huge opportunity
for State Street to expand globally. In contrast, industry-mandated
changes—including straight-through processing and going {tom
three days to one day to settle trades—cost millions of dollars that
would be difficult to recoup from customers.

One State Street

In response to these and other changes, David Spina articulated his
Alient-focused vision of "One State Stieel.” At internal meetings
during 2001, Spina explained: “You've heard me talk about ‘Ome
State Street” That term describes how we must wotk together to
serve our clients, When clients look at State Street, our organiza,
tional lines must be completely invisible, and behind this seamless
face, we must have industrial-strength lines of communication
connecting every part of the company.”

Traditionally, State Street operated asa set of separate business
Units. “One Stale Street” embodies the strategic imperatives dle.
Seribed by Spins at the 2001 annual meeting. "Tist, we will con.
tinue to enrich our relationships with existing clients, We under,
stand that as our clients grow and succeed, we will grow and
succeed. So taking care of existing clients is our ftst priority. Secs
ond, we will continue to grow our client base outside the United
States, World markets olfer almost unlimited opportunity for in-
vestment managers and servicers, and our leadership in U.S, man.
kets gives us an advantage over our competitors, We'te very excited
about the grovsth we savy last year—particularly in Canada, Tuixem-
bousg, the U.K,, and Japan."

State Street management believed that shared IF infrastructure
‘as important to enable this single point of contact. Historically,
State Stet’ TT organization had been highly decentralized. A small,
central IT organization provided network services, data center oper-
ations, and transaction processing for mutual funds, pension funds,

--- PAGE 98 ---
178 TT GOVERNANCE

4h of the four major business units had @

and global operations.
self-contained IT operation responsible for operations. Only a small
number of infrastructure services, such as the communications net-

work, were provided centrally.

Designing IT Governance

To deliver “One State Street” required a single point of contact

and consistent client view of State Street to develop new business
and reduce time to market, John Fiore, then CIO of State Street, rec
ognized that the firm needed a new governance structure to facili:
tate these changes. Because of its traditional business unit auton~
omy, governance had not been important at State Street, The
corporate CIO managed the small set of shared infrastructure serv
ices as well as headquarters applications, The new corporate vision
introduced a new set of desirable behaviors, including: the develop-
ment of a consistent view of the customer across State Street; busi-
ness unit adoption of new technologies; the creation of one TT
community across State Street; and the introduction of justification
techniques for enterpriseivide If investment, such as pro forma
business cases and measurement of IT impact. The new governance
design is summarized in figure 6-7.

State Street’s new governance arrangement (figure 6-8) focuses
on the firm's requirements for customer intimacy and synergy
across autonomous business units. A business monarchy makes [T

principles and TT investment decisions. 11 monarchies assume
responsibility for the more technical IT decisions of infrastructure
and architecture, receiving broad-based federal input for IT infra-
siructure, Business application decisions are made with a duopoly
involving business unit leaders, IT professionals from the business
units (vertical [P groups) and IT shared services (horizontal Tt
groups). This model provides for both business unit and enterprise-
wide perspectives in TT governance decisions.

‘The key mechanism for implementing State Street's business
monarchy is the IT Executive Committee (ITEC), composed of the

10, the CAO, the ClO, and senior executives from State Street's
various business units, ITEC is responsible for reviewing, analyzing,
and synthesizing the IT investment needs of individual business

Fiaune 6-7

State Street Corporation's IT Governance

Entorprise strategy

Business
performance goals

1 governance
fsrangements

‘and organization

row naw bus

‘tate Stest

:
5
i

5
:

inser sates

1 prchtsture

TT duopoly decides

1 Business application naeds

i
2
;
i

IT governance
‘mechanisms

hating of rset

+66

Eg
uF
Pad

on custome ven ant “One

sty adaption thout panaly

J

rmaton Syste Resear ISR, Used wth persion,

A
Fy

--- PAGE 99 ---
180 IT GOVERNANCE

FIGURE 6-8

State Street Corporation’s IT Governance Arrangements Matrix

7 ir Business
—t ‘ach, cy ii
2 | ce Teasers 1 se i}
| ES |
l jmiescers|

(7 ee conan patra ss

€ 2009 RET Sloan Seto Cer ar oraton Sytem esarch ISR, Usd wit pemieson

units in order to create an enterprisewide IT budget. The leaders of
each business unit and the CIO identify the key IT business and
infrastructure projects for the coming year. ‘These projects are classi-
fied according to their contribution to the corporate growth tar-
gets and importance to their business unit. The result is a list of
all IT initiatives for the coming year, ITEC members negotiate
among themselves to create a reduced list of projects and IT infra-
structure initiatives designed to meet the corporate growth targets
and the agteed-upon percentage of the operating expense budget
available for information technology. Once ITEC has decided on

Linking Strategy, IT Governance, and Pestormance BL

the list of projects, the IT organization tracks the allocation and use
of the IT budget by project ane business unit using an activity
tracking system.

ITEC has several advantages over earlier IT business unit
specific investment processes, The negotiation of an enterprisewide
I budget encourages focus on the enterprisewide value of [T rather
than on the needs of individual business units. The individual busi-
hess executives naturally tend to focus on the profitability of their
own business. By combining discussion of infrastructure investment
with business unit initiatives, the value of making investments in
cnterprisewide infrastructure for shared use becomes much clearet.

The IT monarchies for infrastructure and architecture rely on
two mechanisms: the IT Leadership Group (IG) and the Office of
Architecture. ITLG, composed of all senior business unit amd coxpo-
rate IT managers, defines IP strategy. This group also establishes
linkages with corporate and business unit executives, For example,
high-level architectal standards are presented by ITLG to ITEC to
get input and buy-in, The Office of Architecture existed prior to the
new governance arrangements. Historically, the Office of Archite
ture had been responsible for reviewing overall architecture frame-
works, identifying and recommending technology standards, and
conducting research in applied technology. The Office's enhanced
Tesponsibilities now include monitoring projects for best use of and
compliance with standards, When a standard is not available, the
Office of Architecture coordinates with project managers to iden-
tily and implement the most appropriate technology to satisty the
business need. The expanded role for the Office of Architecture
made it a more effective force both to promote sharing and reuse of
technology across the enterprise and to support the deployment
of new technology for developing new business. The mission and
methodology of the Office of Architecture have been codified in a
set of IT Architecture Principles linking technology to the business.

Evolving IT Governance

Larly evidence suggested that State Street’s IT governance structure
encouraged desirable behaviors. ‘Testimonials from project man-
agers indicated that the architectural review process helped deliver

--- PAGE 100 ---
182 IT GOVERNANCE

solutions more quickly because technology issues surfaced before
they critically impacted the projects. The shared infrastructure was
evolving to address the joint needs of the businesses. A messaging
hub capable of interfacing with a wide variety of platforms began
servicing applications for the four different business units. This
service was one of several new services reducing IT cost and time to
market.

State Street has developed and tracked business metries influ-
enced by IT. The metric system, using a common baseline of 1997,
demonstrates the impact of IT on such key business performance
indicators as the number of State Street portfolios, the number of
client positions calculated, and the number of daily net asset values
(NAVs) calculated for NASDAQ. For State Street, these metrics pro-
vide clear measures of the impacts of IT investments on business
performance. Por example, the number of NAVs calculated has in-
creased nearly threefold between 1997 and 2000, At the same time,
the I cost per NAV bas been reduced by 50 percent,

In late 2002, Joe Antonellis, a former line-of-business head, be-
came CIO. He has elected to keep the current IT governance model
in place, Joe's focus is on the importance of continuing to align IT
strategy with the business strategy, “We are focused more sharply
than ever on ensuring that State Street's IT vision and business strat-
egy are aligned with our clients’ demands and needs." Monthly
Strategy Steering Committee meetings, chaired by David Spina,
support the alignment of IT and business. ‘These meetings set the
overall business strategies, which then trickle down to provide
guidance to ITEC and subsequently I? in terms of priorities.

As part of cost-cutting initiatives in 2002, the IT budget was
decreased. At the same time, IP reporting lines changed so that 70
percent of all IT staff reported to the CIO, up fiom 45 percent in
2001. This change facilitated desirable behavior for “One State
Street.” The IT organization structure enabled significant consolida-
tion of infrastructure, resulting in significant cost savings and cost,
avoidance, while still facilitating new offerings to clients such as
custom data marts.

‘This case illustrates good IT governance. Governance evolved
as State Street evolved from a set of independent business units to
“One State Street” and more recently to a firm operating in a period

Linking Suategy, [T Governance, and Performance 184)

of a declining stock market, State Street used If yovernance explic-
itly to encourage the desirable behaviors needed to implement its
strategies, As State Street strives for additional data and process syn
ergies, it might further acjust its governance mechanisins. Increas-
ing synergies will likely force greater involvement in IT governance
on the part of process leaders and business unit heads, In other
words, IT governance will evolve as the firm's strategy evolves.

Management Principles for Designing
Governance to Address Strategic Objectives

This chapter has discussed how enterprises design their governance.
Effective governance design consists of a rational set of arrange-
ments and mechanisms harmonized with strategy, structure, and.
desired outcomes, Management teams can assess their governance
by mapping their governance arrangements and mechanisms onto
a Governance Arrangements Matrix and checking whether those
arrangements make sense given the enterprise's strategic objectives.
Four management principles summarize how IT governance design,
helps enterprises achieve their strategic objectives:

+ Make tough choices. TT governance design encourages desir-
able behaviors, but if management has been reluctant to
establish strategic priotities, individuals receive mixed sig-
nals about appropriate behavior. [T governance design
requires tradeoffs. Thus, management must decide which is
‘more important: autonomy or synergy; operational excel-
lence, customer intimacy, ot product leadership? Every
enterprise has conflicting goals, but top performers commit
to a small set of most ctitical objectives.

‘+ Develop metrics to formalize the strategic choices. TT value can
be difficult to measure. By estublishing metrics te capture
progress toward strategic goals, management can design IT
metrics indicating whether IT governance is working.

Determine where organizational structure lintits desirable behav
iors and design governance mechanisms to overcome the liniita-
tions. Even when enterprises succeed in choosing a small set
of strategic priorities, tradeoffs remain, IT governance can

--- PAGE 101 ---
184 IT GOVERNANCE

transcend organizational structures to enable objectives that
are inconsistent with the organizational design,

+ Allow governance to evolve as management learns the role of If
and how fo accept accountability for maximizing IT value.

‘Throughout this chapter we have noted that governance should
transcend formal organizational structures and enable strategic ob-
jectives. Increasingly, enterprises are secking the strategic agility to
recognize and respond to unpredictable changes in their market-
places. Agility demands an ability to rethink business strategy
based on market changes. But in most enterprises a major shift in
strategy would force @ change in organization structure because the
structure was designed to achieve a particular strategy. By overcom-
ing the limitations of organizational structure, governance can en-
able greater agility in enterprises. Thus, effective IT governance will
become increasingly important as the pace of change accelerates.

Government and
Not-for-Profit
Organizations

IN MANY COUNTRIES, more than one third of the economy
consists of government organizations, including defense, immigra~
tion, utilities, police, education, and health. Add other not-for-profit
organizations, such as charities, nongovernmental-organizations
(NGOs), and private schools and universities, and the percentage is
even larger, For convenience, we will refer to all these organizations
including government agencies as not for profits, Not-for-profit
organizations are significant users of If, Similar to for-profit enter-
prises, IT consumed an average of 8.4 percent of the annual budgets
of the seventy-four not-for-profit organizations we studied. How-
ever, not-for-profit organizations have poorer governance perfor-
mance—probably a reflection of broader and more multifaceted
strategic objectives. The other chapters in this book are equally rel-
evant to for-profit and not-for-profit managers, However, this chap-
ler deals exclusively with the complex IT governance issues facing
senior managers of not-for-profit organizations.

First we will explore some of the complexity faced by not for
profits with a case study of the design of IT governance at the
United Kingdom's Metropolitan Police Service-Scotland Yard. We
introduce a framework that takes account of this complexity and
discusses value creation in not-for-profit organizations, With the

185

--- PAGE 102 ---
186 I GOVERNANCE

value framework ay « starting point, we have found it easier to
design not-for-profit IT governance. Using the data from our study,
we will then look at how not-for-profit organizations govern [T
compated with for-profit firms, With governance performance as the
measure of success, we then look at how top not-for-profit gover-
nance performers govern and the mechanisms they use. Finally, we
close with a case study of evolving IT governance at UNICEF, using,
the value framework as a guide.

Metropolitan Police Service-Scotland Yard

The Metropolitan Police Service (MPS)-Scotland Yard provides
policing services for London and also has national responsibili-
ies. MPS-Scotland Yar employs over forty thousand people,
approximately 25 percent of the lotal police service for England.
Over 1,500 of MPS-Scotland Yard employees are in the Direc
torate of Information, Ailsa Beaton, Director of Information for
MPS-Scolland Yard, also represents the Association of Chief Police
Officers (ACPO) on the board of the national Police Information
‘Technology Organization. Policing in England and Wales is funded
by both central and local authorities and overseen through a tripar=
lite arrangement between the home office, police authorities, and
ACPO.

MPS-Scotland Yard Works with
a Strong Committee Structure

MFS-Scotland Yard has six business units and a strong desire for
greater synergies actoss all its operations, ‘The executive body
for MPS is the Management Board, which has two top-level com-
mittees, one for performance review and one for resource allaca-
tion, Under these committees are fourteen strategic committees,
one of which is the Information Management Steering Group
(MSG), Depending on the area of operation, the IMSG reports to
each of three groups—Management Board, Performance Committee,
and Resource Committee,

‘The underlying value discipline of MPS-Scotland Yard is opera-
tional excelfence, with a strong focus on streamlining and improv-
ing processes. The pressure for synergy is very high, particularly

Government and Not-for-Profit Organivations 1s?

around information for solving crimes. MPS describes its IT prinei-
ples as follows: Most of the information needed to investigate and
solve crimes is in one or more independent systems that are located
throughout the MPS. Our challenge is not only to make data input
much easier (and not duplicated) but to make it readily available
anytime, anyplace, and anywhere.*

Ailsa Beaton and her colleagues designed MPS's I’ governance
arrangements to create value by achieving these and other orga-
nization principles, implementing a number of changes in the
‘Ways decisions were made. Figures 7-1 and 7-2 are the Governance
Design Framework and the Governance Arrangements Matrix for
MPS-Scotland Yard.

MP's business objectives include cost efficiencies, better infor:
mation access, cultural diversity, and improved operational excel-
lence with streamlined processes. These objectives are reflected in
business performance goals and desirable IP behaviors, For exam
ple, an important performance goal is to reduce the rate of increase

{in overall cost base, For IT, the resulting desirable behaviors are re-
se of systems and technologies.

IY Investment Process

MPS-Scotland Yard has a structured and transparent process for
making IT investment decisions, Decisions are made on the recom-
mendation of the [MSG, which meets every three months and is
chaired by the deputy commissioner. IMSG has a budget for IT.
related projects and takes a formal IT portfolio approach to IT in-
vestment, The IMSG, in its role as an investment committee, de-
cides on fanded projects as well as how to start or stop projects and
how to fund new work. IMSG also provides input to budgeting.
Each proposed project must be linked to a specific strategy, such
as e-policing, infrastructure, information management, and call-
handling services.

Each proposal has a business sponsor, usually the business pro-
cess owner. Once a decision is made to fund a project, the account-
ability for completion and delivering the benefits is placed into the
work stream of a senior officer. Fach initiative has a program or proj-
ect board, depending on the scope of the initiative. This board is
chaired by the sponsor/senior officer and has a mix of technical and

--- PAGE 103 ---
Governance Design Framework for MPS-Scotland Yard

FiguRe 7-1

Government and Not-for-Profit Organizations 189)

ee a FIGURE 7-2
A Governance Arrangements Matrix for MPS-Scotland Yard
2
\3a5 eT
gee | aT ——|
ge25 Inastctur | anptcaton | rp
ri | ests” | tnvestment_|
tele : | Susoes fre |
ging ge © |
|
o Pe
Beg : ates |
digs i | feel ewe] |
: 5
g,2 2
12250 Ge: ne, ad San Spe Cat noma: Sten Ase 9 auc en
amar esas exe Ae Preach pdin Ease Woonona aan acon ne
5 obey 2a ed pce
i E
4 2 ‘user representatives among. its members, Critical to the decision:
a - making and management process is the focus at MPS-Scotland Yarel
(2283, g i on benefits management and realization. The business sponsors, also
gies 3 EP known as the senior responsible owners, are held accountable for the
Ese \@ if benefit management and realization of the projects they promote,
5 a Infrastructure projects sought by the Information Group face
2 = al the same type of scrutiny as IT-enabled business projects. For smaller
| ft Gi Projects, there is now a simplified process. “We found that the

--- PAGE 104 ---
190 IT GOVERNANCE

procedures we developed brought transparency and accountability
into the process,” explained Beaton. “However, the requirements
became overly complex for small projects. Some developments,
were set in train [initiated] outside our processes as we had made
the process too complex. We now have a group that authorizes
small projects between meetings.”*

In contrast to the IT investment decision-making process, the
Information Group drives the infrastructure strategy decisions. “1
have drawn a strong line between infrastracture and applications
in terms of decision rights,” states Beaton. “When. the business
wants to do something, it is their decision, and we work with them,
But with infrastructure projects, I am the sponsor—and a bidder
like everyone else.”

MPS-Scotland Yard had many different networks. sAs a result,
senior officers needed three different workstations on their desks—
for finance, e-mail, and Internet access. The Management Board
accepted a proposal from Beaton to consolidate the infrastructure
and gradually eliminate the need for multiple workstations. To
date, the consolidation moves have taken several million pounds
Out of the cost base. Costs will continue to drop as officers need
fewer machines. This success is a strong indicator of a successful IT
governance process in an organization where measuring perform-
ance is very challenging. The learning from governance efforts so
fax positions MPS for forthcoming decisions on how to most effec
tively deploy IT throughout the organization,

Framework for Value in
Not-for-Profit Organizations

The successful efforts of MPS-Scotland Yard in implementing IT
governance illustrate many of the challenges facing not-for-profit,
organizations—meusuring performance and value, a culture of
formal committees, limited budgets, and endless opportunities to
create value. A frustration facing not-for-profit executives is that
many of the management frameworks and measures are designed
for profit-seeking organizations where the performance measures of
profit, shareholder value, and good corporate citizenship are clear.
In addition, well-accepted strategy and management frameworks
such as Michael Porter's five-factor model don’t translate well for

Government and Not-for-Profit Organizations lot

nol for profits where there is often little competition and no mar-
ketplace with multiple buyers and sellers (for example, government
services).4 Leaders of not-for-profit organizations need a different
management framework to help strategize and govern. Mark Moore
and others have developed a very helpful value framework for exec-
utives of not for profits, which we adapt here (figure 7-3).3

Authorizing Environment

Moore's framework identifies three key interconnected factors that
must be aligned to generate value in any organization: environment,
capabilities, and value (the three circles in figure 7-3). Not for profits
have some unique characteristics related to value creation, shown in.

FIGURE 7-2

Value Framework for Managing Not-for-Profit Organizations

(authorizing
+ customers

|, Fon provises
[Permission
Resource | ket sa
acquisition * Pottical acceptance
fe Pubic value
+ Goods ard aenices

i | tRuaie gaoue !

_.
capabinies
i} + Organizational v
\ a

Source: Aro fom Joh od, Helooune Busnes Shel Unive Mourn, 1288
Used wan poms,

--- PAGE 105 ---
192 IT GOVERNANCE

italics in figure 7-3. A for-profit organization’s environment is the
market conditions in which it generates capital, finds a market for
its goods, and adjusts to regulatory or resource constraints. In con-
trast, a not-for-profit organization has an authorizing environment of
potential clients or customers (who may or may not pay for ser-
vices), funding sources, and political influences. ‘The not for profit,
is authorized to fulfill its charter by its funding sources, by the
political bodies or legislation who initiated it, and by its clients. For
example, the authorizing environment of a government-owned
and -run water utility has three parts:

* Customers—including citizens, businesses, and others
who use water, wastewater, sewerage, and information
services

+ Fonds providers—including federal and local governments,
water rate payers, and banks

+ Political power hokders—elected officials and the citizenry
who exercise their democratic rights Lo influence the elected
officials or the utility directly, Legislation empowers the
water utility to provide monopoly services and specifies
their geographical regions, service levels, and price points.

‘The addition of the political power holders increases the com-
plexity of the not for profit's authorizing environment compared
with the environment of a for-profit organization. In a for-profit re-
tail store, for example, managers can analyze their industry posi-
tion using Porter's five factors (customers, suppliers, basis for com-
petition, substitutes, and potential new entrants) or a similar
framework. The government water utility must meet the letter of
its legislation and respond to the interests of the political power
holders including its elected board of directors and government
minister, If the citizens using the water utility are unhappy, they
cannot take their business elsewhere. Instead, they put pressure on
the utility via their elected officials,

Capabilities

Every organization needs capabilities to create goods and services.
For-profit enterprises develop some capabilitics internally and pur-

Government and Not-for-Profit Organizations 193

chase or partner to obtain other capabilities to deliver products and
services Lo their customers. Profits, long-term debt, and equity fund
resources develop and leverage those capabilities

In not-for-profit organizations, the authorizing environment
provides resources (see arrow in figure 7-3) in the form of money
and authority to create capabilities, The water utility has many
organizational capabilities, including people who run water plants,
do water testing, and connect new homes and businesses to the
water infrastructure, In addition, the utifity has information impor
tant to builders, developers, and other utilities about how to con-
nect to the utility's infrasteucture.

A unique feature of not for profits is that through legislation,
regulation, or influence they can require other organizations to add.
capabilities that help the not for profit meet its goals. For example,
MPS-Scotland Yard can influence corporations to use particular
types of security procedures. ‘The fire clepartment sets and enforces
tules and codes about fire protection systems in buildings that re-
quite the building owner to invest in safety measures. ‘the water util-
ity can require particular filtration systems be used in factories con-
nected to the utility's wastewater systems, These exteznal capabilities
‘add coproduction (see the arrows in figure 7-3) to the production of
the not-for-profit organization. For example, MPS-Scotland Yard's
internal capabilities produce goods with public value (see circle on
right of figure 7-3). The external capabiities of firms’ security sys-
tems coproduce with MPS a safer environment, which also has pub-
lic value, For-profit firms generally cannot require other organiza-
tions to create external capabilities or generate coproduction.

Public Value

For-profit firms generate value through goods and services pur-
chased by customers, Successful firms also generate value for theit
owners. This value is measured and represented in financial state-
ments, Not-for-profit organizations generate public value in adi
tion to the private value represented by goods and services, such as,
in our water utility case, water, sewerage, wastewater, and informa-
tion services.

Public value has two additional parts illustrated for the water
uuilivy

--- PAGE 106 ---
sae IT GOVERNANCE

«+ Public goods—yoods and services all citizens receive, even If
they don't directly pay for them—for example, clean
‘peaches with no effluent flow, clean and sustainable water
catchment ufeas, public deinking fountains, and published
statistics on water quality

+ Bquity—correcting market faifures—such as prosecuting
water polluters or providing discounts for water services (0
the unemployed or aged

Other organizations such as MPS-Scotland Yard also provide
public value by ensuring social order—an important precondition
ot only for eltizens engaging in community affairs but also [or the
operation of the market—by protecting property rights and enfore:
ing contracts.®

Public value in not for profits extends beyond the organization
ike a series of concentri¢citcles, Schools or water willtles provide
ing excellent services will attract new people to tive in the are OE
thaws businesses to open, These businesses in turn generate valley
pay taxes, and employ workers who further increase prosperity
has, the performance of the water wtility Is not captured tn the
financial suxplus (ot deficit) the utility produces each year oF in
the physical infrastructure the utility creates. The willty’s perfor:
Thane iy also reflected in water quality, sustainable environmental
management, and the effect of its services on the community. For
schools, the measurement of performance fs even more compli:
cated and includes potential lifetime value created by students even
peyond the local area, For MPS-Scotland Yard, the total measute-
eat of value is virtually immeasurable —avokdance of crime feel:
ing of security, justice, opportunity to concuct businesses, and soon

The public value created by @ not for profit cesulls in delivery
ack to the authorizing environment in the form of transfers and
provision of services (soe the atrow in figuee 7-3). The authouzing St
vizonment grants permission back to the creators of public value it
the form of market signals (incteased demand) and political accept
dance, Bvery not-for-profit organization, whether gavernment agency
‘or NGO, operates with this type of complexity and interconnected
environment. The task for its managers is to create publie valuc fo
the maximum extent possible given expectations of the authorlz-

Government and Nobior-Pront Spee a

ing envionment and the available intesnal and external capabiti
ties_-in other words, to align the three factors represented by the
circles in figure 7-3,

particular Challenges for Governance
in Governments and Not for Profits

Lhe complex environment of not-for-profit organizations creates
challenges for IT governance, We will focus on four complexities
common to all not for profits here, but there ate often several oth-
fers to consider, for example, freedom of information acts, national
secutity, encouraging the local technology industry, transparency,
shrinking budgets, and democratic rights to voice opposition.

Measuring Value and Performance

‘rhe broad concept of public value in not-for-profit organizations
makes measuring value and performance very complex, For exam
ple, the Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA) Is one of the largest pio
Thaers of public power in the United States. TVA isa wholly owned
self-supporting corporate agency of the US. government responsi:
le for developing the resources of the seven-state Tennessee Valley
region and supporting its economic development

Similar to other utilities, TVA assesses performance with mea~
sures including power generation and distribution costs per amy
service quality levels, and debt reduction, TVA must also be self
Supporting and manage its cash flow, debt, ancl nftastructune N=
Tnvestment while charging fair prices. With TVA\s responsibilities
for developing the resources of the Tennessee Valley rego and
supporting its economic development, broader measures of per-
Formance beyond the organization must also be considered. These
onder value measures axe always tough to quantify—for example
vubat is the value to the Tennessee Valley of an atfordable, uninter=
rupted power supply?

‘The difficulty of measuring value and performance makes IT n=
vyestment, alteady an uncertain science, more of am art. For Exe
ple, calculating the net present value for an TT investment within.
the center of TWA’s concentric cixcle of value is only the starting:

--- PAGE 107 ---
196 IT GOVERNANCE

point, he impact and thus net present value of the investment must
also be assessed for the outer concentric circles—how do you value
a reliable source of cheap power in attracting new businesses to the
valley? One governance approach is to provide a voice to people in
the authorizing environment who are outside the organization.
Either an input or decision-making voice is possible, Perhaps a rep-
resentative of the yovernor's office is on the IT investment commit-
tee of the state-owned utility. Broadening the representation on the
mechanism used for IT governance in several of the five IT dec
sions is a common and effective approach to dealing with complex-
ity in not for profits.

IT Infrastructure Investment

Infrastructure investments can be justified in three ways: They are
mandated (there is no need to cost justify), they reduce costs (can
quantify and value and thus cost justify), or they enable new capa-
bilities (often hard to quantify and value and thus option value is
used). For example, at MPS, the infrastructure consolidation pro-
duced measurable IT savings but should also lead to quicker solving
of crimes—a benefit that is much harder to value or predict. Not for
profits typically have more mandated enabling infrastructure in-
vestments than do for-profit organizations. And enabling invest-
ments, particularly in government, are often political and attract
public attention and debate, For example, schools fund computers
in classtooms because parents insist on it, Countries, states, and
Cities fund mobile networks for police agencies because saving time
in transmitting information about crise or criminals can save lives,
Not-for-profit infrastructure investments also enable others to cre-
ate public value through facilitating external capabilities and co-
production, Infrastructure investment justification requires valuing,
and balancing all three ways infrastructure can be justified, How
should a not for profit make infrastructure decisions? Who shoul
make those decisions? Who should pay for the infrastructure?

In some cases, such as utilities, rates for users of the infrastruc-
ture can be adjusted Lo reflect operating costs to pay for the infra-
structure, But very often, rate adjustments are not possible or prac-
tical. Balancing their prices, infrastructure investment, debt, and

Gov

ment and Not-for-Profit Organivations 197

service levels to create broad public value is the critical infrae
structure governance issue for not-for-profit executives. If reverie
comes Irom budget allocations, as it does for organizations like the
police, armed forces, immigration, and prisons, arguments (that are
sometimes successful and sometimes not) are made to the funding
authority based on demonstrated need (such as homeland security
or flood prevention)

When funding comes from fees, not for profits are likely to use
similar analyses to those of for-profit organizations. For example,
all utilities make significant infrastructure investments, both physt-
cal andl IT. Due to the capital-intensive nature of the electric utility
industry, TVA rigorously evaluates and selects which capital, opera-
tions, and maintenance projects to fund. Funding for IT projects is
subject to the same process as requests for steam generators and
turbine overhauls, All TVA projects are reviewed by the Project Re-
view Committee, which is sponsored by the chief operating olficer
and composed of Key executives including the CIO. The expected
value of IT projects is meant to be directly comparable to the ex-
pected value of the other types of business investments,

Where coproduction or broader public value is created by other
entities using the not for profit’s infrastructure, justification and
the question of who pays can be a barrier thal stops sensible value
caeation, John Glaser, CIO of Partners Healthcare, explains: "It is
difficult to NPV these projects across the board. The why and how
of IT justification in different circumstances applies different val-
ues, There are difficult issues in terms of who should be responsiisle
for costs. If quality of care is the goal, should the insurance pro-
viders be paying for it? It is difficult to align the value systems with
Tesource responsibility. There are misaligned incentives in our busi-
ness models, A lot of things don’t get implemented because a lot of
the value is to society rather than to the person who forks over the
capital.”

Despite these challenges, not-for-profit organizations do suc-
ceed in aggregating resources for infrastructures whose public value
extends beyond organizational boundaries. Joe Adamski, CIO of
Barwon Water, the largest regional water authority in the Aus-
Uualian stale of Victoria, outlined his vision for a regional computer
center lor the greater Geelong area:” “Barwon Water covers over

--- PAGE 108 ---
198 IT GOVERNANCE

eight thousand square kilometers. Within this region, there has
recently been an amalgamation of a number of councils. ‘These
organizations serve the same customers as ourselves. We have artic
ulated the benefits of using common databases, mapping, and
other information to serve these customers. Benefits include a ser-
vice one-stop shopfront where customers could pay rates and water
tariffs and apply for property approvals. The systems we now have
at Barwon Water would be a good starting point in building this
regional concept. Data is one of our region’s most valuable assets,
and there is no point in duplicating it.”

This vision is slowly being realized. Adamski says: “With the
geographic information systems (GIS), there is some hope of hav-
ing a regional concept for this area, which would give the whole
region a competitive advantage. There are many organizations
that have expressed an interest in working with us. On top of that,
we have many day-to-day queries wanting access to data. For ex-
ample, we are using our TT infrastructure to do floodplain manage-
ment for a number of consultants undertaking work for several
councils in Melbourne and VicRoads in Gippsland. They supply the
data or we capture it and do the analysis in partnership with the
consultants.”

Governing IT infrastructure in not for profits requires different
tools and mechanisms than in for-profit organizations. Funding for
mandated infrastructure must be linked back to the mandate or leg-
islation. Cost-saving infrastructure can be valued using traditional
‘NPV approaches. The enabling investments must take into account
the value created in the concentric circles of constituencies defin-
ing public goods. Invariably, the potential value-adding projects far
exceed resources available. Project prioritization must consider the
extended public value of projects to understand their relative worth.
Again, external representation on committees for infrastructure
investment decisions can be valuable.

Coproduction and Architectures

Coproduction provides unique opportunities and responsibilities
for not-for-profit organizations. Well-designed coproduction can
increase many times the effectiveness per dollar invested in IT.

Government and Not-for-Profit Organizations 19

Poorly designed coproduction is confusing, frustrating, and bureau-
cratic and creates little value, More recently, coproduction requires
the coproducing organization to electronically connect to the not-
for-profit organization. At the simplest level, this connection may
involve posting regulations and information on the not-for-profit
organization's Web site. More integrated coproduction enables the
coproducer to download tools and directly interact with the not for
profit's systems to coproduce.

For example, the Australian Tax Office (ATO) has achieved nearly
100 percent online individual tax retum submission. Tax propar
tion agents are required to submit returns electronically using spec-
ified standards. The software firms building tax preparation tools
for tax agents follow the ATO architecture guidelines to ensure
compatibility for their customers. This coproduction by tax agents
has simplified the ATO processes, removing the need for data entry
and facilitating online tax assessment. Benefits of this coproduc-
tion have been passed back to the taxpayer in that tax refunds are
typically received in two weeks rather than six.

To achieve this type of coproduction, IT’ architecture decision
makers must consider many issues outside the organization. For the
ATO’s electronic filing to succeed, the tax agent had to be comput
erized. The agent's systems had to comply with the ATO’s standards
for electronic filing and the agent had to be trained to use the
system. We expect fo see many more creative efforts by not-for-
profit organizations to encourage coproduction using IT. A key
dilemma for governance and decision makers is the willingness and
capability of the coproducers to invest in standard compliant sys-
tems. Does the not for profit have the power to encourage, cajole,
or force coproducers to comply to create broader public value? How
broad should the representation be on the IT governance decision-
making mechanism?

Citizens, Clients, and Customers

Virtually all government organizations operate in some type of leg-
islative authorizing environment that requires the organization to
provide services. Some consumers of these services pay the not-for-
profit organization; an example is houscholders paying for water or

--- PAGE 109 ---
200 IT GOVERNANCE

electricity consumed. Other consumers are clients who receive the
services—welfare or public education, for example—because they are
eligible. Other consumers are citizens who may consume services
such as police and national parks and pay for these services indirectly
via income taxes typically not related to their levels of consumption.

Making IT decisions requires balancing the needs of the three
types of consumers—customers, clients, and citizens. Meeting the
needs of clients rather than customers requires a broader market
perspective and involves different market dynamics of supply and
demand than it does in the for-profit sector. Recognizing the spe-
cific beneficiaries of any IT investment project and knowing who
foots the bill for any particular consumer group can help align
investment projects with funding sources. For example, many wel-
fare agencies around the world could double their budgets and still
not meet all legitimate demand, The direct beneficiaries of welfare
programs are not the people who fund them (taxpayers and legisla-
tors, in most cases). Thus, attaining IT investment funds for welfare
programs requires either demonstrating that the investment will
lower program administrative costs or persuading taxpayers and
legislators that the public value accrues back to them. This complex
market for services influences all investment decisions in not for
profits, including IT. To understand demand, satisfaction, and per
formance, it is particularly important for many not for profits to
collect data on their clients, Online service delivery significantly
increases their ability to collect client data.

‘These four factors and many others influence the way not-for-profit,
organizations govern IT, resulting in slightly different IT gover-
nance patterns relative to for-profit firms. All four factors lead
toward broader representation often from outside the organization
‘on many governance mechanisms. The broader representation en-
sures a voice for multiple stakeholders, but broad representation
typically slows down decisions and makes consensus agreement on
value much more difficult.

How Not-for-Profit Organizations Govern

The two bell-shaped distributions of governance performance
in figure 7-4 illustrate a similar performance distribution in the

Government and Not-for-Peafit Organizations 201

Figuae 7-4

Comparing Governance Performance of Not-for-Profit and
For-Profit Organizations

Average for-profit = 7056 ‘Average not or rot = 659%

(n=?)

ul

Bd sos OG ers
Governance Perfarmance

Percent of Enterprises

News

et emopise For pct eneies

12208 mF Sen Sect Cake or format Ser Pace 16

for-profit and not-for-profit sectors. However, governance perfor.
mance in not for profits is statistically signilicantly lower than in
for-profit organizations." Perhaps IT governance is less mature in
not-for-profit organizations, but we doubt it. More likely, the com-
plexity described earlier makes performance measurement, organi-
zation goal setting, and thus IT governance more difficult in not
for profits, resulting in an average 10 percent lower governance
performance

The comparison between for-profit and not-for-profit IT gover-
nance (figure 7-5) reveals more similarities than differences, but
five patterns of IP governance in not-for-profit organizations are
notably different:

‘+ More business monarchies in all decisions except
architectures

© Significantly fewer IT’ monarchies in all decisions

* More federal arrangements in all decisions except
investments

--- PAGE 110 ---
202 IT GOVERNANCE

Comparing IT Governance Arrangements in Not-for-Profit and
For-Profit Organizations

| Business | IT invest.

iG 7 Application | ment and

Architectore | Infrastructure | Needs

Tre ptasag nee ete aah ce iol pop = 7 ari toons vite = 18

192009 Sinan Shel Cone oman Sto Reseach (CISA. Us wih poms

* More federal arrangements for inputs to all decisions

* More duopolies for IT architecture

All the differences reflect the broader representation of decision
making we recommended in the previous section. For example,
fewer IT monarchies and more federal arrangements lead to broader
involvement in decision making. Top governance performers find
ways to deal with this complexity and govern differently from the
average not-for-profit organization.

How Top Performers Govern

Top not-for-profit governance performers exhibit three major dif-
ferences from other not for profits. They have aligned value cre-

Government and Not-for-Profit Organizations 203

ation and IT governance design, they use slightly different patterns
of governance arrangements, and they use particular governance
mechanisms very effectively:

Aligned Value Creation and
Governance-Designed Frameworks

Just as a clear strategy is a prerequisite for effective governance
in for-profit enterprises, effective governance design for a not for
prohit requires clarity about how value is created (see Figure 7-3). In
all the not for profits with effective IT governance in our study, the
Process began with understanding and communicating the way
value was lo be created. The top performers articulated their re-
quired capabilities both internally and via coproduction to create
maximum value within the limits of their authorizing environ-
ment. Clarifying value creation provides the input needed to create
a well-harmonized IT governance design framework (for example,
refer to MPS-Scotland Yard in figure 7-1),

Top Governance Performers Govern Differently

Studying the best and worst governance performers in not-for.
profit organizations provides some general guidelines when using
our two frameworks”? These general guidelines are a starting point,
without considering factors such as sector, principles, culture,
funding, and so on. All else being equal, we would recommend fol-
lowing these guidelines.

Use Joint Business and IT Decision
Making for Principles

Joint business and IT decision making combines the strategic
input on value creation from senior management with the IT lead-
ers’ understanding of the technology and organizational capabili-
ties. Together they can find the right balance of aligning IT to the
business needs and shaping the business strategies by what is possi-
ble technically. For example, many government agencies around
the world are successfully innovating with online govenment (or
e-government) to both improve services and reduce costs but also

--- PAGE 111 ---
204 IT GOVERNANCE

to encourage IT use in their communities. The Prime Minister of
England, Tony Blair, mandated that all government services would
be on line by 2008 and then backed up the target date to 2005.
Setting IT principles in not for profits often requires coordination
with objectives or mandates set outside the organization. ‘This re-
quirement limits local flexibility but increases overall value.

Consider IT Infrastructure Principles
to Be Strategic Business Decisions

In all not for profits, but particularly government organizations,
infrastructure decisions are strategic and should be made by busi-
ness monarchies or arrangements with strong business input. Typi-
cally, services are information-based, making IT the key infrastruc
ture, For example, many governments are striving to provide life
event servicing, Imagine that you have just experienced a life event,
such as buying a house, turning eighteen, getting married, or mov-
ing to a new residence, Rather than contact each government
agency independently, life event servicing enables you to interact
through a single point of contact. Therefore, if you move you can
provide the new address on a government Web site and identify,
from a list, all the agencies you wish to instruct to update your de-
tails. IT infrastructures are critical to these strategies, and there are
many opportunities to consolidate and reduce cost by sharing.
Business monarchies for making infrastructure decisions are un-
usual (only 11 percent) and time consuming but often used by top
performers. Even though the IT leaders may be better equipped
technically, they often don’t represent the broader constituencies
required in not for profits. More important, business involvement
ensures buy-in at the top level to making and utilizing infrastruc-
ture investments, Organizations entrusting infrastructure decisions
to IT monarchies need strong business input.

Don’t Use a Feudal Model

for Business Application Needs

Over 20 percent of not-for-profit organizations use a feudal
model for business application needs. For many not for profits the
natural tendency is to use feudal models to specify the needs for
different agencies, regions, or departments as they try to best serve
their local clients. However, the central leadership of most not for

Governunent and Not-for Profit Organizations 205

Profits is also striving to implement organizationwide programs
such as improving service quality or reducing cost by removing
duplication. The tension between the dual pressures of autonomy
and centralized strategic focus results in poorer governance per-
formance. We suggest avoiding feudal models for business applica-
tions needs except in the rare situation where there is no synergy
between business units and no organizationwide initiatives

Use Joint Decision Making for IT Investments

As with IT principles, duoplies for IT investment decisions com-
bine the strategic input of senior management with the technologi-
cal understanding and the organizational capability of the IT lead-
ers. The top governance performers often use this approach to IT
investment and prioritization. Where business monarchies are well
informed about IT issues and include the CIO playing a leadership
role, they are also very effective for investment decisions,

Mechanisms Used by Top Performers

Committees and other formal organizational mechanisms are often
a strong part of the culture in not-for-profit organizations. Organi
zations such as MPS-Scotland Yard effectively use committees to
ensure representation and transparency in difficult policy and oper-
ational decisions. Top governance performers use a relatively large
number of formal mechanisms to implement their governance and
reinforce the governance arrangements with a lot of communica
tion. The result is a high percentage of senior executives who can
accurately describe IT governance and use it elfectively. The rela-
tively large number of mechanisms adds overhead and, potentially,
delays to making IT decisions but results in more commitment and
higher performance.

Senior management of not-for-profit organizations with good
TT governance performance identified the following mechanisms as
highly effective in implementing their governance arrangements:14

+ Executive committees focused on all key assets
including IT

+ If council comprising business and IT executives

+ [leadership committee comprising IT executives

--- PAGE 112 ---
206 IT GOVERNANCE

+ Architecture committee
+ Tracking of IT projects and resources consumed

+ Business/IT relationship managers

Just having these mechanisms is not enough. We heard a num-
ber of horror stories about mechanisms being ineffective. For exam-
ple, a common complaint was that senior executives would agree
to serve on committees but then would not attend meetings or
would send lower-level nominees who didn’t want to make hard
decisions, resulting in delays and frustration.

UNICEF Case Study

‘To learn from the experience of a much admired and effective global
not-for-profit organization, let’s turn to a case study of UNICEE
UNICEE moved from an organization using IT in a very limited way
until the mid-1990s to an organization in which IT is fundamental
to ils operations today.

UNICEF aligns its environment, capabilities (internal and exter-
nal), and value creation. Using the value framework in figure 7-3,
we can analyze how UNICEF creates value from its capabilities
within its authorizing envionment

Authorizing Environment—Customers,
Funds Providers, and Political Power Holders

The United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) is the only
United Nations organization mandated to advocate and act for and
with children to protect their rights and to help meet their needs.
‘An extract from UNICEF's mission statement provides insight to
some of its objectives: “UNICEF mobilizes political will and mate-
tial resources to help countries, particularly developing countries,
ensure a ‘first call for children.’*" UNICEF conducts “programs of
cooperation” in 162 countries, areas, and territories. These pro-
grams are planned and implemented in cooperation with govern-
‘ments, nongovernmental organizations, other UN agencies, and
local communities. UNICEF is governed by a thirty-six-member
Executive Board. Board members are elected by the United Nations
Economic and Social Council and normally serve a three-year term.
UNICEF is funded by voluntary contributions, two thirds from gov-

Government and Ni

for-Profit Organizations 207

emments and one third from the private sector, Income in 2002
was US. $1.454 billion. UNICEF's funding and authority enable

the building of significant capability both within and external to
UNICEE

Capabilities—Organizational and External

UNICEF's 7,100 staff members represent a powerful organiza-
tional capability delivering services worldwide including immuni-
zation such as polio vaccines and tetanus, school refurbishment,
AIDS education, early childhood development, and programs to
protect children from violence. In Afghanistan, a vast effort by
UNICEF and its partners to get the country’s seven thousand
schools up and running cleared the way for 3 million children to
attend school—one third of them girls—many of whom had never
seen the inside of a classroom. In Kenya, the largest-ever national
immunization effort undertaken in Africa succeeded in immunizing
more than 13 million children against measles. In Swaziland,
UNICEF joined with communities to provide care and support for
children orphaned by HIV/AIDS, who are among the world’s 14
million children under fifteen who have lost one or both of theie
parents to the disease.

Resides direct production, UNICEF encourages coproduction of
value by other organizations to benefit children. UNICEF lobbies,
influences, and educates governments and other authorities to im-
Prove conditions for children, UNICEF has many partnerships with
other not-for-profit organizations such as GAVI (Global Alliance for
Vaccines and Immunization) to create value. In addition, UNICEE
works with many for-profit firms (for example, AEON, MasterCard
International, IKEA, and Starwood Hotels and Resorts Worldwide) to
raise money for children and provide services. For example, Star-
wood Hotels and Resorts Worldwide, Inc., continues supporting
UNICEF programs through the flagship program Check Out for
Children, which has raised more than $7 million since 1995 and in
addition participated by raising funds for immunization programs.

Public Value—Goods and Services,
Public Goods and Equity

The public value UNICEF creates is immeasurable. The goods
and services provide education, relief, support, opportunity, and

--- PAGE 113 ---
208 EY GOVERNANCE

hope for children, The public good reduces illness, ignorance, suf-
fering, and despair. If UNICEF is successful, not only do the chil-
dren benefit but so does the world’s economy. UNICEF's equity
value objectives attempt to right many wrongs—injustice, poverty,
prejudice, sexism, and exploitation,

With such broad-based value creation objectives, governing IT
and all the other key assets at UNICEF demands tradeoffs. Spending
on infrastructure to manage UNICEF leaves less for directly provid-
ing services to children. ‘Total management and administration
costs in 2002 were 6 percent of total expenditure,

Business performance goals

IT Governance at UNICEF

UNICEP’s business objectives include achieving results for children,
sharing and reusing information globally, and achieving opera-
tional excellence under difficult field conditions with limited budg-
ets (figure 7-6). Performance goals include operational, program,
and social development targets. Program and social development
targets are far-reaching and difficult to measure and quantify. The
mes of a UNICEF intervention into children’s lives may not
be apparent for years,

UNICEF also operates in very unpredictable and dangerous
settings. UNICEF has long-term presence and operates on site be-
fore, during, and after armed conflict, natural disasters, and other
tragedies, In emergencies, UNICED must rapidly set up field offices
and communications infrastructures. For example, in such envi-
ronments the UNICEF office is provided with a set of rapidly de-
ployable “fly-away VSAI" stations delivering the maximum con-
nectivity and IT suite: voice, fax, data, electronic mail, and even
video conferencing, It also provides access ta voice communica-
tions (VoIP), Lotus Notes, the public Internet, and the UNICEF cor-
porate intranet, using the lull suite of [1 core office business appli-
cations, while at the same providing the safety and security of staff
implementing UNICEF program objectives. Using this creative and
mobile IT infrastructure enables UNICEF to quickly establish a base |
that can grow to # more substantial station over time, |

Operating in so many countries with highly autonomous field
representatives makes global governance a constant issue. Says

|

é
:
i
4

oute

ee

se of working

arc Yr Shon St

Enterprise strategy and organization

UNICEF Governance Design Framework
Ir organization and desiabie behavior

FIGURE 7-6

i
a]
é

--- PAGE 114 ---
210 IT GOVERNANCE

Andre Spalz, UNICEF's C1, “AS a CIO, | invest a lot of my time in,
making governance work at all levels, to educate, coach, mentor, and
lobby. In a global organization, governance is quite a challenge. We
face high pressure for synergy across UNICEE, and at the same time,
we have high pressure for local autonomy trom the regional and
country offices. CIO leadership in a global IT organization is not
just command and execute. We must continually empower people
with a vision and execution strategy and position governance ele-
ments within a global framework, Part of my role is to ensure that
we do not centralize too much and that our I organization adapts
to the different cultural environments we work in.”

Until the mid-1990s, there was little IT’ in UNICEF offices, and
TY was far from a CEO-level concern. The IT organization dealt pri-
matily with headquarters (11Q); the field offices were basically on
their own. There were few LANs, 0 common desktop environ-
ment, stand-alone, custom-built applications, no global network,
and little use of the e-mail system, due to high long-distance dial-
up costs. An executive-sponsored management reengineering pro-
gram to streamline UNICEF was launched in 1995 anc 1996 to
improve efficiency and effectiveness and to decentralize decision
making and accountability to the regions and countries where field
activities take place, These changes were accompanied by recentral-
ization of UNICEF and its use as an integral and enabling part
of the management transformation.

Over the past few years, IT has fundamentally transformed the
way UNICEE operates and has improved global knowledge, infor-
mation flow, transparency, and communication, Field offices now
have transaction-level information and value-adding information
they did not have before. IT has become a true differentiator for
UNICER,

Evolving IT Governance

‘The UNICEF governance arrangements are presented in figure 7-7.
Officer-level executives, including the CIO and the global manage-
ment team, make decisions for IT principles, IT infrastructure
strategies, IT architecture, and IT investment and prioritization.
‘This centralized approach is balanced with broad-based inputs via a
duopoly of business unit leaders and functional unit heads working

Government and Not

for-Profit Organizations 2u

Flaune 7-7

UNICEF Governance Arrangements Matrix

© i” ia Business |

22008 eat, no, ar aT Stan Sto Can tation Syatens Poser CHA apt sn
‘anne ‘raf earn puslcator “esc I" Goveranen, Harare Baer at
Peer Na suay 2003 ees wt parson

with IT managers. Business application needs are decided using a
duopoly of IT executives, business unit leaders, and business pro-
cess owners, ‘To achieve this level of governance sophistication,
there were thiee main stages of evolution at UNICER First was
project-level governance. Second was acloption of a global IT strat-
egy and infrastructure, Thitd was implementation of a global IT
portfolio management process. Educating management about re-
curting IT costs, operating costs, and mandatory system upgrades
hhas been a challenge through all three stages.

--- PAGE 115 ---
212 IT GOVERNANCE

Governance evolved initially from ad hoc fragmented manage-
ment to individual project governance. The first major example
was delegated authority from the CEO to four division directors,
who became fully accountable for implementing the H1Q financial,
logistics and private sector-related modules of SAP's enterprise
resource planning system. They delivered on time and within
budget—replacing more than a hundred legacy Wang systems. This
success would not have been possible without project-level gover-
nance and ownership. This governancefownership process has be-
come the model for all major IT investment projects in UNICEF. To
sustain operational governance, a regular weekly meeting of both
HQ functional and IT heads was established to address process and
IT issues. The decisions are reviewed by senior management twice a
year or as required. IT is cosecretary and codriver of this process,
but itis not the process owner.

TT infrastructure has been a major investment area at UNICEE.
‘Today, everyone has a standard desktop or laptop and applications,
office automation tools, and Internet and intranet access. ‘The in-
tranet is used as a global knowledge repository for UNICEF infor-
mation, including IT procedures. One of the major infrastructure
initiatives was the deployment of a global IP network in 80 percent
of the countries, with guaranteed bandwidth services, quality of ser
vice, and local Web caching. This deployment was not a trivial task,
given the global reach of UNICEF's operations. The network forms
the foundation of UNICEF's new Web-based applications. Field staff
members who formerly felt isolated are now far more connected
and can leverage real-time information. The infrastructure has
democratized and changed the information culture of UNICEF and
is providing more transparency for the governance process.

Another major infrastructure initiative, the “Organization Man-
agement Systems,” contributed to the organizational change process
by creating common tools, systems, and user support processes like
the global services desk or IT staff training and certification in ITIL
standard IT services management. The systematic collection of
data, coupled with processes such as call monitoring and problem
management to conduct quantitative analysis, allows resources to
be targeted to areas that require correction quickly and effectively.
At the same time, to keep HQ IT staff members in touch with field

Government and Not-for-Profit Organizations 213

operations, they spend nine to twelve months on the global service
desk, which runs 24/7/365 and supports all UNICEE locations. This
rotation program significantly improves their understanding of the
complexities of supporting such a culturally diverse population

And the rotation is used in career development and advancement
planning. The service desk has become an integrated business/IT
help facility that provides transparency and information to overall
governance.

A corporate-level IT portfolio management process was imple-
‘mented when demand for IT services grew to be several times larger
than the IT budget. Now the executive management team, division
heads, and business heads, rather than IT alone, present and justify
IT investment requests. This approach provides a clear organiza-
tionwide framework for investment priorities. While some local
flexibility and adaptability are necessary, strong governance on IT
standards, infrastructure, and global applications has facilitated
staff and skills redeployment around the globe,

Managing Information Is Key

Managing knowledge and information are crucial governance ele-
ments at UNICEF because both must be sitared between countries
on many topics. Five years ago, representatives or country heads
shared documents and knowledge in person ot by distributing
Paper. Today, UNICEF's intranet has become the information and
knowledge repository for the entire organization,

At rst, there was great debate about ownership and governance
of the Internet, and UNICEF had up to twenty-five individually run
country Web site Hovcever, the infrastructure was consolidated for
cost and security reasons in 2000, Content is provided locally, but
it is centrally hosted and under a corporate umbrella, which pro-
¥ides the global touch while maintaining local involvement

Today, governance is accepted throughout UNICEE. There's one
overall IT strategy encompassing headquarters, regional, and locil
levels. That strategy is periodically validated with a broad con-
stituency. Nevertheless, IT must coach, educate, and push the busi-
ness to understand how to govern IT Transformation takes time, but
Tin a rolatively short time—has become a fundamental enabler

--- PAGE 116 ---
214 IT GOVERNANCE

and mission-critical part of the organization. UNICEF competes
for funds from governments, private corporations, and individuals.
IT governance has become important in achieving focus and flexi
bility to be competitive.

What Is Different in Not for Profits

In many ways, IT governance in not-for-profit organizations is the
same as for profitseeking firms. But the differences are important
and stem from a more complex value creation setting. The broader
definition of public value and the ability to develop extemal capa-
bilities and coproduction result in different approaches to IT gover
nance. Add the cultural norms of not for profits, with more focus
on consensus, transparency, and equity—all of which affect IT gov-
emance design. Successful IT governance in not for profits relies
even more on partnerships and joint decisions between business
and IT leaders as well as heavier use of formal mechanisms such as
committees. More and more not for profits will include representa-
tion from outside the organization on their IT governance mecha-
nisms to reflect their broader definition of value. Changing gov-
emance arrangements less often in not-for-profit organizations is
even more important as the time to communicate and implement
new procedures is often longer.

Leadership Principles
for IT Governance

IN CHAPTER 1 we asked:

+ Do vour IT capabilities enhance your business competitive-
ness—or throttle it?

Do managers throughout your organization recognize thett
responsibilities for the effective management and use of IT
or do they assume the IT unit will take care of such things?

* Do your IT investments target enterprisewidle strategic

priorities—or are resources frittered away on diverse tactical
initiatives?

We now add a new question:

* Is your IT governance encouraging desirable behavior in the
use of IT?

The premise of this book is that the difference between nega-
tive and affirmative responses to these questions is a reflection of
TT governance. Simply stated, enterprises with effective IT gover-
hance generate strategic benefits from IT through the [T-related
desirable behaviors of their people. IT governance requires senior
‘management leadership. This chapter addresses leadership fitst by
identifying the urgency for action. We look at symptoms of ineifec-
tive IT governance—the more symptoms like these you see, the

215

--- PAGE 117 ---
216 IT GOVERNANCE

more urgent the need for senior management action. Then we
briefly review the steps to designing or rethinking IT governance.

Next we identify the top ten leadership principles for effective IT
governance and provide a checklist for leaders. Because good IT gov-
emance inevitably stipulates a significant leadership role for the
CIO, we then review criteria for assessing and motivating the CIO.
We then leave you with some predictions for the future of IT

governance.

Symptoms of Ineffective Governance

IT governance is an issue whose time has come. Current invest-
ments of capital and management attention in IT compel caref
evaluation of IT governance. In addition, the strategic impact of IT
decisions raises the stakes for effective IT decision making and
implementation. Good governance improves IT decision making
and performance. Governance design is about getting the right
people to make IT decisions and monitor performance. Good gov-
emance empowers the right people to make decisions even as
needs change. Here are some common symptoms of governance
not working. We have provided some simple yardsticks for each
symptom to help assess urgency for intervention. How healthy is
your I governance?

Senior Management Senses Low Value from IT Investments. Do
senior managers have a lingering, gut-level concern or doubt about
the business value derived from their IT investments? Senior man-
agers typically react in one of several ways to this concern. Some
‘managers dive in to learn more about IT, making more IT decisions
personally and centralizing control. Others abdicate responsibility
to colleagues such as managers in the IT unit because they are
unsure how to act or don’t think it’s important. Still other senior
managers engage consultants or make new hires to “fix the prob-
Jem,” Rather than starting with increasing control, abdication, or
bringing in new people, first look at IT governance. Perhaps the
wrong people are making IT decisions or the people making those
decisions need management education. Good governance will pro-
duce metrics supporting or contradicting management's gut feel-

Leade:ship Principles for 1T Governance 27

ing. If everyone on the senior management team cannot point toa
record of how recent IT investments have been performing, gover-
nance is a problem.

IT Is Often a Barrier to Implementing New Strategies. Instead of
acting as a strategic enabler, does IT often act as a barrier? If IT lim-
its the ability to respond to new market opportunities, the IT infra-
structure may be broken. As Delta Air Lines experienced with its in-
frastructure, IT cannot support new initiatives if those initiatives
intend to integrate incompatible systems. This incompatibility could
arise from obsolete technical platforms, redundant applications, or
redundant data with nonstandard definitions. These problems typ-
ically arise from application silos where systems were developed
independently, often on different platforms and at different times
with no enterprise architecture. Fixing the infrastructure requires
bringing IT leaders to the strategy table.

If IT learns about strategic initiatives after decisions are made,
TT finds itself in the position of order taker. IT then builds a specific
solution rather than a platform for the strategic vision. This se-
quencing prevents development of an enabling infrastructure. The
result is that strategic initiatives are very slow to implement, A
common cause of the delay is that the existing IT infrastructure,
such as a customer database or network security, is not capable of
supporting the new initiative. If new infrastructure has to be in-
stalled before every major application supporting the new initia-
tive, governance is failing. A governance process that fails to bring
IY into strategy discussions limits the opportunity to fix the infra.
structure. If competitors are faster to introduce new I-enabled ini-
tiatives, IT governance is a problem.

The Mechanisms to Make IT Decisions Are Slow or Contradictory.
Effective governance comes from a set of well-designed and well-
executed mechanisms that reinforce desirable behavior. Are differ-
ent mechanisms sending contradictory messages to executives? For
example, one firm we studied had IT principles set by senior execu-
tives encouraging the strategic use of IT and specifying that to fail
early and often was good. However, we were repeatedly told of
unsuccessful attempts to shepherd [T-enabled business initiatives

--- PAGE 118 ---
218 LY GOVERNANCE
through the capital investment committee. The committee was led
by the CFO, who approved only projects with clearly documented
and guaranteed cost savings. The result was a plethora of small,
often nonsteategic, [enabled local projects in the business units

“the projects svere below the dollar threshold tequiring-approval
from the CFO's committee, These contradictory messages led to
suboptimal behavior for the fiem,

ust as troubling are mechanisms that obstruct rather than sup-
port project implementations. For example, an architectural excep-
tion process demanding multiple approvals can delay projects—
particularly if the responsible individuals of committees are not
motivated to act quickly ot if criteria for exceptions are not cleat. I
the exception process is not fast and predictable, individuals will be
motivated to act outside the system. If renegade exceptions are in
evidence, governance is a problem

Senior Management Cannot Explain IT Governance. Do senior
managers understand how ITT Is governed? We know from our re-
search that the more managers in leadership positions there are who
can accurately describe IT governance, the better the governance per-
formance. In top-performing enterprises, accountabilities are clear. In
particular, senior managers know what decisions IT makes and what
decisions they must make. If managers can't describe TT governance,
how can they follow it? If fewer than 50 percent of managers in Tead-
ership positions can accuzately describe IT. governance, and the num-
ber is not increasing every month, governance is a problem,

Describing governance is only the starting point. Increasingly,
managers at top-performing enterprises not only understand thelr
responsibilities for TT; they understand the enterprise architecture.
Several senior IT staff people have told us that senior managers reg-
larly ask how proposed projects would affect or leverage their en-
terptise architectures. The ability to articulate the key components
of the enterprise architecture and understand how they enable and
constrain business processes is becoming an important managerial

competency

EF Projects Often Run Late and over Budget. A number of stud

ies over the last ten years in several countries found that the per-

i

Leadership Prine!

for TT Governance 219

centage of IT projects completed on time and on budget is typically
Jess than half. Effective IY governance should provide consistency
in project management and program design, Project management
should ensure allocation of dedicated resources, a disciplined se- —
“quence of stages, and formal project tracking. Good project manage.
ment leads to predictable project delivery. If 90 percent of projects
are not delivered on time and on budget, governance is a problem.

Senior Management Sees Outsourcing As a Quick Fix to I Prob-
Jems. Selective outsourcing of IT capability can be a very effective
‘management strategy. Miny enteiprises outsource commodity IT
services and insource oF perhaps cosource (develop systems cooper
atively with a leading-edge producer) other services. However, some
outsourcing decisions result from frustration with IT. Concerned
about IT costs or lack of value, managers turn to outsourcing as a
quick fix to control the problem. Outsourcing eflectively places a
contract between the IT consumer and provider, If the service cari
be well specified in a contract and the price fairly compared with
the internally sourced cost, outsourcing often leads to reduced IT
costs, To be effective, outsourcing should result from a decision
that particular competencies or services are better provided exter-
nally, The enterprise should have clear expectations for the per-
formance of the provider and how the externally provided services
{it into the enterprise architecture. Outsourcing as a quick fix moti-

vated by frustration with IT outcomes suggests that governance fs a
problem,

Governance Changes Frequently. Governance need not be
changed with every small strategic change or shift in emphasis. The
executives working within the IT governance mechanisms make
decisions implementing the strategic changes. For example, when
Amazon.com added electronics and then clothing to its product,
lines, the firm was changing its strategy to include nonprinted
products, But its fundamental strategy of providing online services
to customers had not changed. Amazon needed some new func-
tionality on its site, vendor relationships, and even systems to sup-
port the business processes, but the shift in strategy did not change
desirable behaviors, Thus, no change in governance was necessary.

--- PAGE 119 ---
It GOVERNANCE

Managers operating in the existing governance arrangements made
necessary adjustments to the enterprise's II’ principles, investment,
application needs, infrastructure, and architecture

This distinction reinforces the difference between governance
and management. Management is what decisions are made, Man-
agement decisions typically change as strategies change. Gover-
hance is who makes the decisions, and thus changes less often than.
strategy. Changing governance every time you change strategy
should not be necessary as many of the governance mechanisms,
such as committees and budgets, are independent of strategy. Gov-
emance should change only when a change in strategy prompts a
change in desirable behaviors. For example, a shift from a customer
intimacy to a product leadership discipline would signal a change
in how much business unit collaboration is valued, ‘This more radi-
cal shift in strategy—a change in strategic intent—would be likely
lo drive changes in governance,

Trequent changes in IT governance almost guarantee ineffec-
live I use. Unable to comprehend or keep up with the changes,
managers are likely to completely ignore governance. If governance
of one or more of the five key If decisions changes very fre-
quently—more than once a year—governance is a problem

‘We have listed seven. common symptoms of poor IT governance. If
an enterprise reached the threshold! described on any one symptom
(for example, 10 percent late or overbudget projects), we would be
concerned about IT governance. The more symptoms observed in
an enterprise, the sicker the governance and the more urgent the
need for management attention.

Steps for Reviewing and Designing
IT Governance

This section presents a brief summary of the steps for attacking the
symptoms by designing or rethinking governance.

1. Map the enterprise's current governance onto both dia-
grams—the Governance Design Framework and the Gover-
nance Arrangements Matrix (as for State Street Corporation

|
:
|
|
|
|
|
|
|

Leadership Principles for I Governance 221

in chapter 6). The inability to quickly create either of these
two diagrams is symptomatic of a lack of clarity in
1 governance.

- Compare the two diagrams and ask hoy well the objectives

on the Governance Design Framework are achieved by the
arrangements of the Governance Arrangements Matrix.
Focus on performance goals not being achieved, How might
govemance arrangements be tweaked to address perfor
mance goals?

Audit IT governance mechanisms.

a. How many mechanisms are in use? Do they overlap
across more than one key IT decision? Are they also
to govern the enterprise's other key assets (for example,
human relationships; see figure 1-1)?

b. Ate they effective independently and together (see chap-
ter 4)?
Ina senior management team meeting, debate the upper left
and right boxes of the Governance Design Framework, Then
determine your preferred Governance Arrangements Matrix
{also the middle box of the Governance Design Framework)
based on your strategy and performance goals. A good ap-
roach is to study the governance patterns of top performers
(chapter 5). For example, if your enterprise wants to focus
on industry-leading revenue growth, consider the gover-
ance arrangement patterns of top performers on growth as
a starting point. Then tailor the governance template to
your enterprise's culture, structure, strategy, and goals (chap-
ters 5 and 6). This step is the art form of governance design.
We don’t know of any concrete rules that work here, Rather,
be guided by your instincts as to what works (or perhaps
what should work) in your enterprise, Be sure to align incen
tive and reward systems with IT governance

Lead the change using the “to be” versions of the Gover-
hance Design Framework and Governance Arrangements
Matix for your enterprise. Use these diagrams to communi-
cate, teach, convince, refine, and measure the success of IT
governance.

--- PAGE 120 ---
222 IT GOVERNANCE

Top Ten Leadership Principles
of IT Governance

From studying and working with hundreds of enterprises, we have
distilled the lessons from many outstanding leaders into ten princi-
ples of IT governance. We intend these principles to provide leaders
with a succinct summary to use as a primer, refresher, or checklist
as they refine their IT governance.!

1. Actively Design Governance

Many enterprises have created disparate IT governance mecha-
nisms. These uncoordinated mechanism “silos” result from gover-
nance by default—introducing mechanisms one at a time to ad-
Gress a particular need (for example, architecture problems or
overspending or duplication). Patching up problems as they arise is
a defensive tactic that limits opportunities for strategic impact from
11. Instead, management should actively design IT governance
around the enterprise's objectives and performance goals.

Actively designing governance involves senior executives tak-
ing the lead and allocating resources, attention, and support to the
process. The diagrams in this book enable an analysis of all the gor-
emance mechanisms and enterprise goals. For some enterprises,
this will be the first time IT governance is explicitly designed. Often
there are mature business governance processes to use as a starting
point. For example, the Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA; described
in chapter 7) piggybacked its IT governance on its more mature
business governance mechanisms, such as its capital investment
process. TVA’s IT governance included a project review committee,
benchmarking, and selective chargeback—all familiar mechanisms
from the engineering side of the business.

Not only does overall governance require active design, but
each mechanism also needs regular review. Focus on having the
fewest number of effective mechanisms possible. Many of the en-
erprises we studied had as many as fifteen different governance
mechanisms, all varying in effectiveness. Fifteen mechanisms may
possibly be needed but it’s highly unlikely. All fifteen will certainly
not be very effective, integrated, and well understood. Many enter-

Leadership Principles for IT Governance 223

prises with effective IT governance have between six and ten inte-
grated and well-functioning mechanisms. One goal of any gover-
nance redesign should be to assess, improve, and then consolidate
the number of mechanisms. Farly in the learning cycle, mecha-
nisms may involve large numbers of managers. Typically, as senior
managers better understand IT value and the role of IT, a smaller set
of managers can represent enterprise needs.

2. Know When to Redesign

Rethinking the whole governance structute requires that individu-
als learn new roles and relationships. Learning takes time. Thus,
governance redesign should be infrequent. Our recommendation is
that a change in governance is required with a change in desirable
behavior. For example, State Street Corporation, JPMorgan Chase,
Carlson Companies, and UNICEF all changed their governance to
encourage desirable behaviors resulting from significant changes in
strategy. All four enterprises designed governance to achieve their
desired balance of business unit autonomy and commonality. State
Street, JPMorgan Chase, and Carlson were all attempting to gener-
ate more synergies. UNICEF used IT to transform its operations and
improve global sharing, information management, transparency,
and communication. These transformations involve many other
issues besides IT and take many months to implement.

In these types of transformation, IT governance can be used as
one of the levers to encourage change. For example, State Street
Corporation introduced enterprisewide IT budgeting, encouraging
a shift in perspective from the business unit to the corporation.
JPMorgan Chase's buy-hold-sell process accomplished the same
objective at a technology level. These governance processes com-
municate and enforce new desirable behaviors to facilitate organi-
zational transformations.

3. Involve Senior Managers

In our study, firms with more effective IT governance had moxe
senior management involvement. ClOs must be effectively in-
volved in IT governance for success. Other senior managers must

--- PAGE 121 ---
224, VP GOVERNANCE

participate in the committees, the approval processes, and perfor-
. For many enterprises, this involvement is a natural
extension of senior management's normal activities. For example,
MPS-Scotland Yard used its strong existing management commit-
tee structure to improve IT governance and gain greater synergies
across all its operations. The Information Management Steering
Group (IMSG) is one of fourteen strategic committees that connect
to the top-level executive committee. This interlocking committee
structure ensures senior management attention to IT in the context
of the whole enterprise

Senior management necessarily gets involved in strategic deci-
sions. This means that senior management is rarely concerned with
the exception process. However, if an exception has strategic impli-
cations, it may reach the executive level IT Steering Committee.
UPS CEO Mike Eskew explained the top management role: “At
some point, if it comes to you, then you say, ‘This is the answer. It’s
part of our jobs to make those kinds of decisions. Our ClO, Ken
Lacy, almost always has it solved by the time it gets to me." In
firms like UPS, senior management occasionally gets involved in
exception decisions because those decisions represent strategy deci-
sions. If the exception request escalates to the CEO, then it’s no
longer a technology issue. At that point it’s a strategic choice.

‘Many senior managers are willing to be involved but are not
sure where to best contribute. It’s very helpful for the CIO and his
or her staff to communicate IT governance on one page with a pic-
ture like the Governance Arrangements Matrix. The matrix pro-
vides a vehicle for discussing each senior manager's role and any
concerns they have.

mance review

4. Make Choices

Good governance, like good strategy, requires choices. It's not pos-
sible for IT governance to meet every goal, but governance can
and should highlight conflicting goals for debate. As the number
of tradeoffs increases, governance becomes more complex. Top-
performing enterprises handle goal conflicts with a few clear busi-
ness principles. The resulting IT principles reflect these business
principles, Old Mutual South Africa’s (OMSA) six IT’ principles, or

Leadership Principles for If Governance 225

“nonnegotiables,” as they are called, provide a useful framework
for how to use IT. The first principle, which all OMSA business units
‘must observe, states: “The interest and needs of the Group/OMSA
come first when exploiting technology or when contracting with
suppliers.” Appropriate stakeholders must be involved in the
approval process prior to contracts being signed.

Some of the most ineffective governance we have observed
‘as the result of conflicting goals. This problem was often observed.
in the government sector, where directives come from many agen-
cies. The result was confusion, complexity, and mixed messages, so
the governance was ignored. The unmanageable number of goals
typically arose from not making strategic business choices and had
nothing to do with IT. We observed that good managers trying dili-
gently to meet all these goals became frustrated and ineffective.

Clarify the Exception-Handling Process

Exceptions are how enterprises learn. In IT terms, exceptions chal-
lenge the status quo, particularly the IY architecture and infrastruc
ture. Some requests for exceptions are frivolous, but most come from
a true desire to meet business needs. If the exception proposed by a
business unit has value, a change to the IT architecture could benefit
the entire enterprise, We have described the exceptions process of
UPS, State Street Corporation, and other enterprises. All these exem-
plars have three common elements to their exceptions procedures:

1. The process is clearly defined and understood by all. Clear
criteria and fast escalation encourage only business units
with a strong case to pursue an exception.

2. The process has a few stages that quickly move the issue
up to senior management. Thus, the process minimizes
the chance that architecture standards will delay project
implementation.

3. Successful exceptions are adopted into the enterprise archi-

tecture, completing the organizational learning process.

Formally approved exceptions offer a second benefit in addi-
tion to formalizing organizational learning about technology and.

--- PAGE 122 ---
226 IT GOVERNANCE

architecture. Exceptions serve as a release valve, relieving the enter
prise of built-up pressure. Managers become frustrated if they are
told they can’t do something they are sure is good for business.
Pressure increases and the exceptions process provides a transpar-
ent vehicle to release the frustration without threatening the gover-
nance process.

6. Provide the Right Incentives

There has been so much written about incentive and reward systems
in enterprises that we feel the topic is well covered and understood.
Nevertheless, a common problem we encountered in studying IT
governance was a misalignment of incentive and reward systems
with the behaviors the IT governance arrangements were designed
to encourage. The typical concern: “How can we expect the gover-
nance to work when the incentive and reward systems are driving
different behavior?” This mismatch is bigger than an IT governance
issue. Nonetheless, IT governance is less effective when incentive
and reward systems are not aligned with organizational goals.

A major governance and incentive alignment issue is business
unit synergy. IFT governance is designed to encourage business unit
synergy, autonomy, or some combination, as discussed in chapter
6, the incentives of the executives must also be aligned. For exam-
ple, in a large consumer products firm, the CEO wanted to increase
synergies between business units to provide a single face to the
small number of important customers that did business with sew
eral business units. The CEO and CIO worked together to design
IT governance to align the enterprise IT assets to support the
new objective. The new IT governance encouraged sharing of cus-
tomer information, contact logging, pricing, and order patterns
across business units, However, it was not until the business unit
executives’ incentive system was changed from being nearly 100
percent based on business unit performance to being 50 percent
based on firmwide performance that the new IT governance gained
traction.

Avoiding financial disincentives to desirable behavior is as
important as offering financial incentives. DBS Bank in Singapore
does not charge for architectural assistance to encourage project
teams to consult with architects (see chapter 3 for details). When-

Leadership Principles for IT Goveinance 227

ever incentives are based on business unit results, chargeback can
be a point of contention. Enterprises can manipulate charges to
encourage desirable behavior, but chargeback pricing must be rea-
sonable and clearly understood.

It is hard to overestimate the importance of aligning incentive
and reward systems to governance arrangements. If well-designed
TT governance is not as effective as expected, the first place to look
is incentives.

7. Assign Ownership and Accountability
for IT Governance

Like any major organizational initiatives, IT governance must have
an owner and accountabilities. Ultimately, the board is responsible
for all governance, but the board will expect or delegate an individ-
ual (probably the CEO or C10) or group to be accountable for TT
governance design, implementation, and performance—similar to
the finance committee or CEO being accountable for financial asset
governance. In choosing the right person or group, the board, or
the CEO as their designate, should consider three issues.

First, IT governance cannot be designed in isolation from the
other key assets of the firm (financial, human, and so on). Thus
the person or group owning IT governance must have an enter-
Prisewide view that goes beyond IT, as well as credibility with all
business leaders.

Second, the person or group cannot implement IT governance
alone. The board or CEO must make it clear that all managers are
expected to contribute to IT governance as they would contribute
to governance of financial or any other key asset,

Third, IT assets are more and more important to the perfor-
mance of most enterprises. A reliable, cost-effective, regulation-
compliant, secure, and strategic IT’ portfolio is more critical today
than ever before. The person or group owning IT governance must
understand what the technology is and is not capable of. It is not
the technical details that are critical but a feel for the two-way sym-
biotic connection between strategy and IT.

‘The CIO owns IT governance in the majority of sizable fms
today.* Other enterprises have chosen either another individual
(the COO or occasionally the CEO) or a committee (say, of senior

--- PAGE 123 ---
28 IT GOVERNANCE

business and IT leaders) to own IT governance, We have not ob-
served any one approach that always works best. It takes a very.
‘business-oriented—and well-positioned—CIO to deliver on the first
consideration and a very technically interested COO or CEO to
deliver on the third, Committees have the problem of meeting only
periodically and dispersing the responsibility and accountability.
Our recommendation is that the board or CEO hold the CIO ac-
countable for IT governance performance with some clear measures
of success. Most ClOs will then create a group of senior business
and IT managers to help design and implement IT governance. ‘The
action of the board or CEO to appoint and announce the CIO as,
accountable for IT governance performance is an essential fist step
in raising the stakes for IT governance. Without that action, some
CIOs cannot engage their senior management colleagues in IT gov
emance. Alternatively, the board or CEO may identify a group to be
accountable for IT governance performance. This group will then
often designate the CIO to design and implement IT governance.

8. Design Governance at Multiple Organizational Levels

In large multibusiness unit enterprises it is necessary to consider
IT governance at several levels. The starting point is enterprise-
wide IT governance driven by @ small number of enterprisewide
strategies and goals, Enterprises with separate IT functions in divi-
sions, business units, or geographies require a separate but con-
nected layer of IT governance. JPMorgan Chase (see chapter 6) has
IT governance at the enterprise, division, and business unit level.
Usually the demand for synergies increases at the lower levels,
whereas the need for autonomy between units is greatest at the top
of the organization,

‘The lower levels of governance are influenced by mechanisms
designed for higher levels, Thus, we advocate starting with the en-
Lerprisewidle IT governance, as it will have implications for the other
levels of governance, However, starting enterprisewide is some-
times not possible for political or focus reasons, and starting at the
business unit level can be practical, Assembling the governance
arrangements matrixes for the multiple levels in an enterprise
makes explicit the connections and pressure points.

Leadership Principles for TT Governance 229

9. Provide Transparency and Education

les virtually impossible to have too much transparency or educa:
tion about IT governance, Transparency and education often go
together—the more education, the more transparency, and vice
versa, The more transparency of the governance processes, the
more confidence in the governance, Many firms like State Street
Corporation use portals or intranets to communicate IT gover-
nance, State Stueet’s portal includes under the section “IT Boards,
Committees, ancl Councils" a desctiption of the Architecture Com-
mittee and all the other governance bodies. The portal includes
tools and resources, such as a glossary of IT terms and acronyms
and the “Computer Contract Checklist.” Often portals include lists
of approved or recommended products. Templates for proposing IT
investments complete with spreadsheets to calculate the IT busi-
ress value are often available.

The less transparent the governance processes are, the less peo-
ple follow them. The more special deals are made, the less con fi-
dence there is in the process and the more workarounds are used.
the less confidence there is in the governance, the less willingness
there is to play by rules designed to lead to increased firmwide per-
formance. Special deals and nontransparent governance set olf a
downward spiral in governance effectiveness

Communicating and supporting IT governance is the single
most important IT role of senior leaders. The person ot group who
owns IT governance has a major responsibility for communication,
Firms in our study with more effective governance also had more
effective governance communication, The more formal vehicles for
communication were the most important. For example, CIOs on
average assessed their enterprises’ documentation of governance
Processes as ineffective. However, the firms with successful IT gov-
enance had highly effective documentation. Highly effective ser-
ior management announcements and CIO offices were also impor-
tant to successful governance.

When senior managers, particularly those in business units,
demonstrate lack of understanding of IT governance, an important
‘opportunity is presented. Working with managers who don't follow
the rules is an opportunity to understand their objections. These

--- PAGE 124 ---
230 I GOVERNANCE

discussions provide insight on whether the rules need refinement
as well as a chance to explain and reinforce the governance.

10, Implement Common Mechanisms Across
the Six Key Assets

We began the book by describing how IT governance fits into
corporate governance (see figure 1-1). We contend that enterprises
using the same mechanisms to govern more than one of the six
key assets have better governance, For example, executive commit-
tees that address all enterprise issues including IT, such as the one
at MPS-Scotland Yard, create synergies by considering multiple
assets,

Recall the exercise in chapter 1 of listing all the mechanisms
implementing each of the six key assets, Each asset may be expertly
governed, but the opportunity for synergistic value is lost. For ex-
ample, @ firm implementing @ single point of customer contact
strategy must coordinate its assets to deliver that uniform experi-
ence. Just having good customer loyalty (that is, relationship as-
sets) without the products to sell (IP assets) will drain value. Not
having well-trained people (human assets) to work with customers
supported by good data and technology (information and IT assets)
will drain value, Not having the right buildings and shop fronts to
work from or in which to make the goods (physical assets) will
drain value, Finally, not coordinating the investments needed (f-
nancial assets) will drain value.

Put this way, the coordination of the six assets seems blindingly
obvious. But just glance back at your six lists of mechanisms and
see how well coordinated—and more importantly, how effective—
they are, Many enterprises successfully coordinate their six assets
within a project but not across the enterprise via governance. In
designing IT governance, review the mechanisms used to govern
the other key assets and consider broadening their charter (perhaps
with a subcommittee) to IT rather than creating a new, indepen-
dent IT mechanism,

These ten management principles highlight many of the key
findings in our work with enterprises. Attention to all of them
should lead to greater value [rom IT. The leadership of the CIO is

i
1
|
|
|
|
|

Leadership Principiles tor IT Governance 231

also critical to creating IT value. Thus, assessing and providing in-
centives for the C10 is our next topic.

Assessing the CIO

An important part of setting incentives is the assessment of the
enterprise key executives, There has been a lot of debate on how to
assess the performance and establish incentives for the CIO, Here
are our suggestions based on conversations with CIOs and other
senior executives. Assessing the CIO requires assessing multiple
dimensions of the C10’s impac

* Responsibilities of the CIO that are clearly under the CO's
control

+ Decisions and behaviors influenced by the CIO

+ Contributions made by the C10 as a member of the senior
‘management team generating value for the enterprise

Therefore, assessing the CIO ultimately takes account of the
business value created by IT4 We suggest the C1O assessment in
clude three factors:

1. TP unit cost and service levels
2. Business and IT’ process management
3. Business value

Figure 8-1 illustrates CIO assessment showing these three im-
portant factors in vertical sections separated by dashed tines, The
vertical axis of figure 8-1 represents the accountability and influ-
ence of various groups—business, [7, and joint.

The first factor contains both the IT unit cost and service levels
that are clearly the responsibility of most C1Os. The IT unit cost is
the cost to the business for each IT service used per unit consumed.
The CIO and his or her team through architecture, sourcing, IT’ man-
agement, and many other activities heavily influence IT unit cost
and should be held directly accountable, The unit cost, not total IT
costs, is the right metric as other people (as described in IT invest-
ment governance) typically are involved in making IT investment
decisions and thus determining total IT cost. The IT service levels.

--- PAGE 125 ---
232, IT GOVERNANCE

Faure 8-1

Assessing the CIO

GIO ASSESSMENT FACTORS

Unit cost
senice levels

é

Accountability and influence

Metrics

aarahe

resulting from the IT investment are also part of the calculation and
an important deliverable of the CIO. Assessing IT unit cost and ser-
vice levels is primarily quantitative based on benchmarks, year-to-year
comparisons, user satisfaction, and meeting service-level agreements.

The second factor relates to converting IT investment into busi-
ness value by enabling business processes. Successful conversion re-
quires at least two types of process management: business and IT.
Business process owners, not the CIO, typically own the business
processes. Therefore business process design and operation are only
partially influenced by CIO activities. The CIO typically has more
dlirect responsibility for the disciplines of managing and imple-
menting systems, including project management, integration, mi-
gration, training, security, and facilities management. These sys-
tems are fundamental to how the business processes are performed,
so the relationship between process and IT management is symbi-
otic and thus hard to assess separately. For this part of the CIO
assessment We suggest a combination of quantitative and qualita-

j

‘wadership Principles for TT Governance 233

tive metrics. Peers, managers, and subordinates can provide quali-
tative input on questions like the contribution, professionalism,
and impact of IT in process management. Quantitative measures
include a wide variety of process and project performance measures
tailored to the business.

The third factor assesses the CIO and his or her team’s conti-
bution to business value through leadership and teamwork, How
has the ClO influenced strategy and helped deliver business value?
The ClO and his or her organization should identify strategic op-
Portunities and recognize potential synergies in the enterprise, par-
ticularly exploiting existing IT capabilities. In addition, the CIO
should help business managers conceive, specify, and implement
their business strategies. Actual business value resulis from unit
cost, service levels and process management, plus business leader-
ship and teamwork.

Measuring and rewarding the business value created by the CIO
should be based partly on the usual enterprise profit and share val-
uation measures used for most senior executives, Another compo-
nent of business value is assessing II’s contribution to business
value and the leadership and teamwork role of the CIO in achiew-
ing it. Again, some parts of the value may be assessable quantita-
tively. For example, in financial services, the total cost per business
transaction (claims processed, credit card transactions, and so on)
are heavily influenced by IT and the CIO's team. Less quantitative
is the contribution of the CIO and his or her team to the enterprise
strategy. More and more, we expect C1Os to be held accountable for
a firm's strategic agility—at least the IT infrastructure components,
but perhaps some part of process agility also. These more strategic
assessments are necessarily perceptual and qualitative.

The bottom line in figure 8-1 summarizes the metrics for C10.
assessment. The three must be weighted for importance, Weighting
the C1O’s performance to the unit cost and service-level part will
motivate a cost focus and service orientation. Weighting more
heavily to the business value will motivate more of a business lead-
ership and influence orientation. Weighting to process manage-
ment will motivate integration between IT and business processes
and a business operations focus.

--- PAGE 126 ---
234 IT GOVERNANCE

Particularly if the CIO has responsibility for IT governance, the
weightings on how he or she is assessed and thus rewarded are crit-
ical. ‘The C1O will naturally focus the IT governance arrangements
to encourage the behaviors encouraged by his or her incentives. For
example, if the CIO'S assessment is based solely on IT unit cost and
service levels, asking the CIO to design IT governance to achieve
other behaviors is a mismatch, Senior management must either
change the way the C10 is rewarded or find another owner for IT
governance.

Current and Future Challenges of Governance

As we gaze into our crystal ball, we see a number of trends that will
influence IT governance; indeed several ate already beginning in
some enterprises. (Twill play an increasingly important role in all
industries, Information about products, services, and customers
will continue to drive business processes. Information about cus-
tomers and their needs will be even more precious, particularly as
the huge changes in privacy legislation take hold around the world.
More and more of the cash flow of an enterprise will be online. For
some enterprises like UPS and Charles Schwab, online revenue is
well over 50 percent, For other enterprises, it is rising rapiclly. All
these changes will only raise the stakes for the importance and
effectiveness of IT governance. Understanding and refining IT’ gov-
ernance now will be a good investment for the future

We see enterprises consistently striving to be more strategically
agile, Enterprises wish to increase the breadth of business initiatives
they can implement quickly—thus being mote responsive to mar-
ket shifts, Because enterprises can't predict the future, strategic
agility is crucial. The traditional approach of changing the organi-
zational structure for each change in strategy will no longer work.
Changing structure is too cumbersome, slow, and imprecise to
meet tomorrow's or even today’s needs for agility. Instead, agility
will be achieved by recombining modular business processes and
activities to meet the new need.

Business process modularity will increasingly depend on an en-
Lerprise’s ability to create standardized, reusable systems, business
processes, and data components. These components will build on

Leadership Principles for ( Governance 238

core processes and infrastructure, Consequently, an enterprise's IP
capability, particularly IT architecture and the resulting infrastruc
ture capability, will be a strong predictor of an enterprise's strategic
agility. Making IT infrastructure and architecture decisions, once
the sole responsibility of IT professionals in enterprises, will con-
tinue to evolve to become more of a joint responsibility. These deci~
sions must become part of the general management tool kit and.
more ancl more integrated into the enterprise’s DNA.

At the same time, enterprises will have to make decisions more
quickly, The need for speed will increwse pressure on governance,
particularly joint business and IT decision making, This pressure
‘means that leaders will continually streamline governance decision-
making structures. Alignment processes will require tweaking to
ensure appropriate incentives, and communication processes will
need refreshing. Duopoly models will become more dominant, In
@ duopoly, both roles are critical—a business person or team must
lake the lead on strategy, process changes, prioritization, and im-
plementation. The more technical person or team must ensure
echnical integrity, project management, reliability, and integra.
tion, Heightened concems about security are already creating
more alliances between technical experts and business operations
leaders,

Enterprises will continue to outsource more commodity IT ser
vices, Pricing andl delivery of outsourced services will become more
like an electric utility, with a connection charge and fees based
on consumption. As the outsourcing industry increases in sophis-
ication, the definition of a commodity service will continue to
broaden. Consequently, enterprises will have smaller IT staffs
Many IT specialists without strong industry-specific skills will mic
grate Lo service providers such as Accenture, CSC, EDS, IP, IBM,
and Microsoft, The remaining IT executives in enterprises will take
more strategic roles. Clarifying strategy and the role of IT as well
as managing vendors will become increasingly critical for internal
TT staff

In the future, describing how much an enterprise spends on
IP will be meaningless. IT will be imbedded in every process and
budget, just like capital. it will no longer be helplul to measure
or benchmark IT investment levels. As a result, just like financial

--- PAGE 127 ---
236 IT GOVERNANCE

governance, IT governance will continue to increase in importance.
Effective governance allows enterprises to extract maximum value
from Ir—and ultimately all six key assets of the enterprise. Effective
governance delivers on a longtime management paradox—encour-
aging and leveraging the ingenuity of all the enterprise’s people
while ensuring compliance with the overall enterprise vision and
principles.
In short, don't just lead, govern!

Appendix A

Research Sites

THE AUTHORS gratefully acknowledge all the participants who
gave so generously of their time and insights.

The research for this book was conducted at over three hundred

enterprises, as follows:

* CIOs at 256 enterprises in twenty-three countries spanning
the Americas, Europe, and Asia Pacific—mostly Gartner EXP.
members—completed a survey designed by MIT Sloan Cen-
ter for Information Systems Research.

*+ Case studies were conducted at thirty-two enterprises:
Abbey National Group*

Air Products Inc.
Brady Corporation
Campbell Soup
Carlson Companies
Citigroup

DBS Bank*

Delta Air Lines
Dow Coming
DuPont

“Case studies completed by Gartner's EXP research group led by Marianne
Broadbent.

237

--- PAGE 128 ---
238

Appendix A

Johnson & Johnson
IPMorgan Chase
Manheim
Marriott
MeadWestvaco
Merrill Lynch
MetLife
Metropolitan Police Service-Scotland Yard*

Motorola

Nestlé USA.

Old Mutual South Africa*

Panalpina

Partners HealthCare

Pfizer

State Street Corporation

‘Tennessee Valley Authority*

Toyota USA

UNICEF

UPS

USAA

Thirty C1Os participated in one-hour telephone interviews
about their IP management practices

Appendix B

Measuring Governance
Performance

TO QUICKLY ASSESS IT governance performance for an enter-
prise, ask the senior management team—we recommend at least
ten manayers—to answer the following questions. Then average
the results and look at variation by business units and level of man-

agement. The formula for calculating governance performance fol-
lows the questionnaire,

Governance Performance Survey

The goal of this survey is to assess the effectiveness of your enter-
prise’s IT’ governance, We define IT governance as specifying the deci-
sion rights and accountability framework to encourage desirable behavior
in the use of IT. Please answer these questions for the part of the
enterprise for which you are responsible.

1, How important are the following outcomes of your IT
governance, on a scale from 1 (Not important) to
5 (Very important)?

Not Very
Important Important
Governance Outcome 1 2 3 4 5
Cost offective use of IF o 80

Effective use oF for growth a
Etfective use of Tor asset utlzation fa]
Ellstive use of for business flexibity oo

--- PAGE 129 ---
240) Appenslix B

2. What is the influence of the IT governance in your business
on the following measures of success, on a seale from 1 (Not
successful) to 5 (Very successful)?

Not very
‘Successful Successful
Success Measure 1 2 3 4 6
Cost-effective use of IT Goo Gg aa
Effective use of for growth ooo Ge
fective use of for assat tization QO oO 8 GE
Effective use of Tforbusinessflebilty = TPE) LE

3, What are the areas where IT governance works best? Why?

4, What are the areas where IT governance is not effective?
why?

Calculating Governance Performance

Question 1 assesses the importance of a particular outcome and
question 2 assesses how well IT governance contributed to meeting,
the outcome. Since not all firms rank the outcomes with the same
importance, the answers to Lhe first question are used to weight
the answers to the second question. Then the weighted scores
for the 4 questions are added and divided by the maximum score
attainable by that enterprise, Therefore, mathematically, gover-
nance performance

to4 {importance of outcome(Q1)
* influence of If governance[{Q2} 3} * 100

©1104 (5 (importance of outcome))

Given that there were four objectives, the maximum score for
all enterprises is 100 and the minimum score is 20. The average
score from 256 enterprises was 69 with the Lop one third of enter-
prises scoring over 74,

Notes

Chapter 1

1. We broadly define the term IT to encompass all the ways an enter
prise invests to generate business value fram IT—by cutting costs, auto-
‘mating or supporting business processes, gaining competitive advantage,
meeting regulations, and using information to manage, sell, account,
control, inform, share with customers, suppliers and partners, iinbed ity
products, and so on.

2, Peter Weill and Marianne Broadbent, Leveraging the New lnfiastrace
‘ture: How Market Leaders Capitalize on 1T (Boston: Harvard Business School
Press, 1998), chapter 3.

3. Profitability was measured by three-year average industey-adjusted
eluent on assets (ROA), See later in this chapter and chapter 5 for details.

4. Peter Weill and Richard Woodham, “State Street Corporation:
Evolving IT Governance” working paper 327, MIT Sloan School of Man
agement Center for Information Systems Research, Cambridge, MA, te-
vised August 2002,

5, Stephen Labaton, °S.E.C, Pushes Companies to Disclose Data
Fasten," New York Times, 28 April 2002, Describes changes by the Securi-
lies and Exchange Commission in response to the announcement of
President George W. Bush four weeks before,

6, Roberto Newell and Gregory Wilson, “A Premium for Good Gov-
emance,” McKinsey Quarterly, no, 3 (2002); 20-2:

7. “Global Investor Opinion Survey,” McKinsey & Company, July
2002.

8. See "The Corporate Governance Site” (www.corpgovnet/links/
Jinks.htzn}), which contains an excellent list of links te many sources of
information on corporate governance. One interesting source, for exami

241

--- PAGE 130 ---
242, Notes

ple, is COSO (Commission of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway
Committee}, which published a dealt ofits “Enterprise Risk Management
Framework" (#yww.coso.org) in ful 2008.

9, Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, Di-
rectoate for Financial, Fiscal and Enterprise Affairs, OECD Principles off
Corporate Governance, SGICG(99) 5 and 219, April 1999.

10, Inspired by the work of Michael Porter, Heney Mintzberg, and
Constantinos Markides. For an excellent overview see Constantinos C.
Markides, "In Search of Strategy,” MIT Sloan Management Review 40, n0. 3
(Spring 1999): 6

11, For a description of how organizations develop and enact beliefs
and values, see chapters by Janice Beyer and Lee Sproul in Handbook of
Organization Design, Volume 2, ed. Paul C, Nystrom and William H, Star-
Duck (New York: Oxford University Press, 1981).

12, Johnson & Johnson corporate Web site, posted 17 April 2003,
hetp:/fwwerjnj.com/our_companyfour_credofindexchtm (extracted 13
May 2003). The J&J corporate credo, which is too long to reproduce here,
begins with the statement "We believe our first responsibility Ts to the
doctors, nurses and patients, to mothers and fathers and all others who
‘use out products and services.”

13. The meeting took place in May 2003 using an anonymous aucli-
ence response system. One of the authoxs, during a presentation of figure
1-1, posed a series of questions to the group.

14, A number of useful definitions and sources of information on IT
governance ate generally consistent in purpose with our definition. Por
example, see the IT Governance Institute (wweeitgi.otg), which defines
IT governance as a "structure of relationships and processes {0 conto}
the enterprise to achieve the enterprise's yoals by adding value hile bal-
ancing visk versus return over IT and its processes.” This definition is

from the IT Governance Institute's “COBIT 3rd Edition Executive Sumn-
mary" of July 2000. The COBIT model describes the “control objectives”
for thiety-four If processes and the management guidelines and outcome
measures for the processes, COBIT also proposes a five-stage maturlly
model of IT governance and a series of tool kits, audit guidelines, and
education offerings to support use of the frameworks, The materials are
detailed and comprehensive and very operationally focused on imple:
mentation and contsal. Another useful definition and perspective is by
Wim Van Grembergen: “IT governance is the organizational capacity
exercised by the board, executive management, and TP management to
contsal the formulation and isplementation of IT strategy and in this
‘unsure the fusion of business and IT" (Wim Van Grembergen, “In-

Notes 243

troduction to the Minitrack: IT Governance and Its Mechanisms,” 35th
HICSS conference, http://computerorg/proceedings!hicss/1874/track8!
187480242.pa_).

15, Stilpon Nestor (lead, Corporate Atfairs Division), “International
bfforts to Improve Corperate Governance: Why and How," Organization
for Economic Cooperation and Development, 11 January 2000.

16, For an excellent discussion of the political perspective and the
source of several of these archetypes, see chapter 5 of Thomas H. Daven-
port and Lawrence Prusak, hyformation Ecology: Mastering the Information
anid Krtowledge Environment (New York: Oxford University Press, 1993).

17. This was the stoongest statistically significant relationship in the
entice study, is explored in detail in chapter 4.

18. This result is [rom the 116 for-profit frms in our stuuly listed on
US. exchanges, Governance petformance is the effectiveness of gover-
nance assessed by the CIO to deliver four IT objectives weighted by
importance: cost-effective use of IT, effective use of IT for asset utiliza-
tion, revenue growth, and business flexibility, Governance performance
hhas statistically significant positive relationships with several measures
of financial performance (Ior example, ROE and market cap growth). The
financial performance metrics such as ROA were three-year average
industry-adjusted measures,

19. B, Gormolski, J. Grigg, andl K. Patter, “2001 I Spending and
Staffing Survey Results,” Gartner R-L4-4158, 19 September 2001. Inchides
both IT budget and “hidden” IT spending outside the IT budget.

20, Estimate by Peter G, W. Keen, a leading author and consultant, in
the foreword to Sacv Devaraj and Rajiv Kohli, The IT Payoff (New York
Prentice Hall Financial Times), 2002}

21. This discussion of IT bombarding enterprises with opportunities
ddraves on Jeff Sampler and Peter Weill, “Core Incompetencies,” MIT
Sloan School of Management Center for Information Systems Research,
Research Brieling, vol. fl, no. 1B, March 2003, These paragraphs were
also influenced by the insightful discussion of the cole, value, and man-
agement of information in enterprises from an economic perspective ira
Catl Shapito and Hal Varian, Information Rules: A Stategic Guide to the
Networked Bconomy (Soston: Harvard Business Schaal Press, 1999).

22, The Standish Group's 2001 Chaos Report estimates that only 28

percent of IT projects succeed.
3. See Jeanne W, Ross and Peter Weill, “Six IT Decisions Your IT Peo-
ple Shouldn't Make,” Harvard Business Review (November 2002): 84-91,
for a description of the roles senior managets should accept in IT deci-
sion making

--- PAGE 131 ---
24d Notes

24. ‘The discussion of UPS throughout this book comes from a series
of interviews by the authors between January 2000 and February 2002
‘with UPS senior management including Mike Eskew, Jim Kelly, Ken Lac
and Joe Pyne, among others. Some of these interviews were also refer-
enced in Jeanne W. Ross, “United Parcel Service: Delivering Packages and
e-Commerce Solutions,” working paper 318, MIT Sloan School of Man-
agement Center for Information Systems Research, 2001.

28. Personal interview with Frank Erbick, former UPS CIO. Also refer-
enced in Jeanne W. Ross, “United Parcel Service: Delivering Packages and
e-Commerce Solutions,” working paper 318, MIT Sloan School of Man-
agement Center for Information Systems Research, 2001.

Chapter 2

1, See Jannes D. McKeen and Heather A. Smith, Making IT Happen:
Critical Issues in IT Management (Chichester, UK: Wiley, 2003) and Robert
W, Zmud, ed., Framing the Domutins of IT Management: Projecting the Fu-
ture... Through the Past (Cincinnati: Pinnaflex, 2000)

2. For example, see Thomas H. Davenport, Michael Hammer, and
Tauno J. Metsisto, “How Executives Can Shape Their Company's Infor-
mation Systems,” Harvard Business Review (March-April 1989): 130-134;
and Peter Weill and Marianne Broadbent, Leveraging the New Infrastruc-
ture: How Market Leaders Capitalize on IT (Boston: Harvard Business School
Press, 1998), 58-62.

3. References to MeadWestvaco are drawn from a personal interviews
conducted by Jeanne Ross with the CIO of MeadWestvaco, September
19, 2002,

4. Melsopolitan Life Insurance Company,
Life insurance Company, September 2001),

5, ACORD is an insurance industry standards body specifying data
formats and technical standards for electronic exchange. For more infor-
ration, see chttp://www.ACORD.com>.

6. For this section we draw heavily on Peter Weill, Mani Subraman,
and Marianne Broadbent, “Building IT Infrastructure for Strategic Agility,”
MIT Sloan Management Review 44, no. 1 (Fall 2002): 57-65; Peter Weill
and Sinan Aral, “Managing the IT Portfolio (Update Circa 2003),” MIT
Sloan School of Management Center for Information Systems Research,
Research Briefing, vol. II, no. 1C (March 2003); and Weill and Broad-
bent, Leveraging Ute New Infrastructure

7. In studying large enterprises, we identified a total of seventy dif-
ferent IT infrastructure services in these ten clusters. For a full list of the

IT Principles (Metropolitan

|
|

|
|

|

Notes 2as

Infrastructure services in each infrastructure capability cluster anid details
cf patterns of capability found in different enterprises, see Peter Weill,
Mani Subramani, and Marianne Broadbent, “IT Infrastructure for Strate
sic Agility,” working paper 329, MIT Sloan School of Management Cen
{er for Information Systems Research, Cambridge, MA, 2002.

8. For an excellent discussion of applying real options to technology
investments, see Martha Amram and Nalin Kulatilaka, Rea! Options (Bos-
ton: Harvard Business School Press, 1998).

9. For more information on these implementations, see Jeff Bailey,
“Trash Haulers Are Taking Fancy Software to the Dump,” Wall Steet four.
nal, 9 June 1999; Joseph B. Cahill, “Whirlpool Experiences Shipping
Delays Over Computer Glitches in SAP Software,” Wall Street fournai,
3 November 1999; and E, Nelson and E. Ramstad, “Trick or Treat: Her-
shey’s Biggest Dud Has Turned Out to Be Its New Technology—At the
Worst Possible Time, It Can't Fill Its Orders, Even as Inventory Grows—
Kisses in the Air for Kmart,” Wall Steet Journal, 29 October 1999,

10. For further information, see Todd Datz, “Portfolio Management:
How to Do It Right,” CIO, 1 May 2003, L

11. For more information on the IT portfolio framework with bench-
marks and historical returns, see Weill and Aral “Managing the IT Port-
folio (Update Circa 2003), MIT Sloan School of Management Center for
Information Systems Research, Research Briefing, vol. Il, n0. 1© (March
2003); and Weill and Broadbent, Leveraging the New Infrastructure, chapter
2. Foran alternative approach, see Jeanne W. Ross and Cynthia M. Beath,
“Beyond the Business Case: New Approaches to IT Investment,” MIT
Sloan Management Review 43, n0. 2 (Winter 2002): 51-59.

12. A 2003 study by DismondCluster International and Kellogg
School of Management of 140 firms found that 24 percent of the firms
actively used IT portfolio approaches for IT investment with 78 percent
expecting to have a program operational by 2004. Ingmar Leliveld ancl
Matk Jeffery, “IT Portfolio Management: Challenges and Best Practices,”
DiamondCluster Intemational Researcs, Spring 2003,

13. The discussion of State Street, including quotes, is draven from
Richard Woodham and Peter Weill, “State Street Corporation: Evolving
IT Governance” working paper 327, MIT Sloan School of Management
Center for information Systems Research, Cambridge, MA, 2001

14. The discussion on Delta Air Lines is drawn lrom "Delta Air Lines:
IT Infrastructure,” a videotape produced by MIT Sloan School of Manage-
‘ment Center for Information Systems Research and Melbourne Business
School, The University of Melbourne, 2001

--- PAGE 132 ---
246 Notes

Chapter 3

1. The average of eight business units was calculated after removing
the top and bottom 5 percent of enterprises in terms of the number of
business units to correct for very large and very small enterprises, thus
giving a better picture of the averaye. The average without trimming was
eleven business units,

2. The feudal entity varies by enterprise and industry with our esti-
mate of the most to least common being business unit, region, function,
and business process.

3, For an excellent discussion of the federal model of organizations,
see Charles Handy, “Balancing Corporate Power: A New Federalist Paper,”
Harvard Business Review (November-December 1992)

4. By duopoly we mean “control or domination by two persons
or groups," as defined by the Oxford English Dictionary, Second Tdition,
198 hup:/idictionary.ced.com/cyifentry/00070944?single=1 &query_type
=word&queryword=duopoly&edition=2essfirst=18max_t0, show=L0 (ac-
cessed 30 May 2003).

5. Discussions of IT governance at Commonwealth Bank of Aus
tralia draw on a personal interview with Peter Reynolds, then Chief Tech-
nology Officer, on January 30, 2003,

6. lables showing industry and regional differences among the
enterprises in our study are available at the following Web site: <luttp:/f
‘web, mit.eclu/cise/itgovbookreferencelinks.htm>

7. Discussion of DuPont's I’ governance draws on a set of interviews
with four DuPont executives conducted by the authors during the period
September-November 2001,

8. For an excellent discussion of "Big Rules,” see Peter G. W, Keen,
“Information ‘Technology and the Management of Diflerence: A Fusion
Map," JBM Spsterns fours 32, no. 1 (1993): 17-39,

9, Petsonal interview between the authors and William Kirkey, Du
Pont’s Chief Technology Officer, October 19, 2001.

10. Personal interview with DuPont IT executive, October 1, 2001

11. This material is adapted from Marianne Broadbent and Peter
Weill, “bffective IT Governance. By Design,” EXP Premier Report, Janu
ary 2003, and is used with permission.

12, Discussion of IT governance at Motorola draws on personal inter-
views with Motorola I executives on and before April 24, 2003,

13. Excerpted ftom the Chairman and President's Letter to Stockhold-
ers in the Motorola 2002 Annual Report as listed at Motozola.com on
Apsll 23, 2003,

Notes 24?

Chapter 4

1. The sole of senior managers in the effective management and
use of IT has been written about extensively. The importance of senior
management involvement was noted early by John F, Rackatt, “The Line
Takes the Leadership,” MIT Sloan Management Review 29 (Summer 1988):
57-64.

2, Marianne Broadbent and Peter Weill, “Eifective Governance By
Design,” Gartner EXP Premier, January 2003. References in this chapter
and elsewhere in the book to governance at Abbey National Group, DBS,
ING, Scotland Yard, Ole Mutual South Africa, Tennessee Valley Author.
ity, and part of the UNICEF case study in Chapter 7 are excerpted with
permission from the Gartner ceport cited above

3. Jeanne W, Ross, "Daw Coming Coxpotation: Business Processes
and Information Technology," Jounal of Information Teluology 14, n0. 3
(September 1999): 253-266

4, Jeanne W, Ross and Natalia Levina, “Bradly Corporation: Deliver
ing Customer Value Through Multiple Channels,” working paper 315,
MIT Sloan School of Management Center for Information Systems Re.
search, Cambridge, MA, 2001, See also www.bradycorp com,

5. The discussion of Campbell Soup IT governance mechanisms is
Graven [com interviews conducted by feanne Ross and Nils Fonstad with
Texecutives at Campbell Soup on September L1, 2002. These interviews
also form the basis for George Westerman and Jeanne W. Ross, “Case
Vignette of Campbell Soup,’ MIT Sloan School of Management Center
{ur Information Systems Research, 2003.

6, References to MeadWestvaco are draven from a personal interview
conducted by Jeanne Ross with the CIO of MeadlWestwaco, September
19, 2002.

7. C. Suzanne lacono, Mani Subramani, and John C. Henderson,
“Entrepreneur or Intermediary: The Nature of the Relationship Man.
ager’s Jab,” in Praccedings of the Sixteenth International Conference on Infor
‘mation Systems, ed, Janice |, DeGross, Gad Ariav, Cynthia Beath, Rolf
Hoyer, and Chutis Kemerer (Amsterdam, 1993): 289-299,

8, Jeanne W, Ross and Christine M. Lentz, “IT Governance at USAA:
Implementing Enterprise-wide Synergies,” working paper 339, MIT Sloan
School of Management Center for Information Systeins Research, 2004,

9. Peter Weill and Richard Woodham, *State Street Corporation:
Evolving IT’ Governance,” working paper 327, MIT Sloan School of
Management Center tor Information Systems Research, Cambridge, MA,
2002,

--- PAGE 133 ---
248 Notes

10. Jeanne W. Ross, Michael R. Vitale, and Cynthia M, Beath, “The Un-
tapped Potential of IT Chargeback," MIS Quarterly 23, no. 2 (June 1999):
215-237,

LL. ‘The Capability Maturity Model (CMM) is a five-level model for
judging the maturity of an organization's software processes. See Mark C,
Paulk, Bill Curtis, Mary Beth Chiissis, and Charles V. Weber, “Capability
Maturity Model, Version 1.1," IEEE Software 10, no, 4 (July 1993): 18-27.

12, Jack Welch, CEO at General Electric for many years, popularized
the notion of intense focus on a few key initiatives. See, for example,
Harris Collingwood and Diane L, Coutu, “Jack on Jack: The HBR Inter-
view,” Harvard Business Review (February 2002): 88-94.

13, Jeanne W. Ross and Richard Woodham, “Chase Global Markets’
Defining New Business Models in the Investment Banking Industry,"
working paper 316, MIT Sloan School of Management Center for Infor
mation Systems Research, Cambridge, MA, August 2001

4, Marianne Broadbent and Peter Weill, “Elfective Governance By De-
sign," Gartner EXP Premier, January 2003, p. 41, Used with permission,

15. This vignette was developed from interviews conducted by Jeanne
Ross andl George Westerman at Carlson Companies headquarters No-
vember 22, 2002, ‘The same interviews form the basis for Nils Fonstad
and Jeanne Ross, "Case Vignette of MIT Sloan School of Mans
agement Center for Information Systems Research, January 2003.

carlson,

Chapter 5
1. The following sources summarize many studies measusing enter-
prise performance that informed our choice of measures and provide
excellent references: Noel Capon, John U, Farley, and Scott Hoenig,
“Determinants of Financial Performance: A Meta-Analysis,” Management
Science 36, 10, 10 (1990): 1143-1159 (an issue focused on the state of the
art in theory and method in strategy research}; David J. Ketchen Jr,
James B, Thomas, and Charles C. Snow, "Organizational Configurations
and Performance: A Comparison of Theoretical Approaches," Academy of
Management Journal 36, no, 6 (December 1993); 1278-1313; the Encyclo
pedia About Corporate Governance, http://www.encycogov.com,

2, We used three years of financial data for the 116 firms listed on.
USS. exchanges in the study and measured average performance and per
centage change per annum, To compare actoss industries, we calculated
relative firm performance by subtracting the three-year industry-average
performance from the firm's three-year average performance. We divided
the result by the three-year industey-average performance, taking into
account that some industries had negative three-year averages. Like all

Nates 249

approaches to industry adjustment this analysis is riot perfect but gives a
good indication of industry-adjusted performance. The average annual
percent change over the three years in each measure was also used in our
analysis but not industry adjusted as the percent change is move readily
compared from industry to industry.

3. The rankings and leverage are approximations derived from the
strengths of the coefficients in regression equations and correlational
analyses and thus are very rough estimates,

4. The three broad strategies used int the analysis are based on the
Idea of value disciplines in Michael Treacy and Fred Wiersema, The Disel=
pline of Market Leaders (Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1995)

5, The figure is based! on statistically significant correlations between
governance performance and the archetypes enterprises used for each If
decision and input considered separately.

6, Quotation from video of interview with Mike Eskew, Chaieman.
and CKO of UPS, discussing IT governance and investment with Jeanne
Ross and Peter Weill, MIT Sloan School of Management Center for Infor-
mation Systems Research, Cambridge, MA, February 2002,

7, To understand which archetypes were classified as business, tech-
nical, and joint, refer to figure 3-2, Business decisions were business
monarchies, feudal, and the bottom line in the federal model, IT deek-

sions were the IT monarchy. Joint decisions were the duopoly and the
top line in the federal model, We excluded anarchies and determined top

nd bottom performers by statistically significant correlations between
governance performance and who made the decision,

8, Based on statistically significant correlations between three-year
(1999-2001) industry-adjusted averages (and changes) in financial per=
formance and governance archetype for each IT decision considered sep-
arately. In a couple of instances the probabilities of significance for the
cortelations were weaker than the usual accepted level for exploratory.
work but were consistent with the overall patterns for the performance
metric and supported by case study analysis. Again, we claim no causal-
ity, but the patterns are interesting and should be regarded as indicative
rather than strong evidence. As always with this type of analysis based
on past performance, using such pattems to predict the future Is prob-
Iematic, Also there are many other factors that influence the financial
performance other than IT governance that we didl not consider,

9. Adapted from chapter 10 in Peter Weill and Marianne Broadbent,
Leveraging the New Infrastructure: How Market Leaders Capitalize on I (Bos-
ton: Harvard Business School Press, 1998) and drawing on Marianne Broad
bent, “The Role of Information Technology in International Business

--- PAGE 134 ---
250) Notes:

Operations: The Case of Citicorp,” Melbourne Business School, The Unie
versity of Melbourne, 1996,

10. Andrew Brand, Peter Weill, Christina Sok, and Pelly Periasamy,
“Citibank Asia Pacific: Positioning IT as a Strategic Resource," case study,
Melbaurne Business School, University of Melbourne, 1999.

AA, Peter Weill, Mani Subramani, and Marianne Broadbent, “IT Infra-
structure for Strategic Agility,” MIT Sloan Management Review 44, 00, 1
(Pall 2002): $768,

12. Richard Woodham and Peter Weill, “Manheim Interactive: Selling
Cars On Line,” working paper 314, MIT Sloan School of Management
Center for Information Systems Restarch, Cambridge, MA, 2001. Far ad
ditional information, see http://wwv.manheim.com.

13. Ibid.

1, Thi.

Chapter 6

1. We use the very insightful ideas of value disciplines developed.
by Michael Treacy and Fred Wiersema, The Discipline of Market Leaders
(Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1995)

2, JPMorgan. Chase case study written from interviews with cam-
pany executives during the period September 2002 to May 2003 and
[rom Marianne Broadbent and Peter Weill, "Effective IT Governance. By
Design,” Gactner EXP Premier Report, January 2003.

3, Marianne Broadbent and Peter Weill, “Effective IT Governance.
By Design,” EXP Premier Report, January 2008, p. 53.

4, Thi.

5, The bottom line in figure 6-3 is estimated from statistically signif
icant correlations of the three-year adjusted performance of eighty-seven
firms in our study.

6. Treacy and Wiersema, in The Discipline of Market Leaders, argue
that customer intimacy is consistent with a profitability goal. We did not
find evidence for a relationship between customer intimacy and profit in
our study.

7, See Thomas H. Davenport, Jeanne G. Harris, and Ajay K. Kohli
“How Do They Know Their Customers So Well?” MIT Sloan Management
Review 42, no. 2 (Winter 2001): 63-73,

8. Table draws on Jeanne Ross, David Robertson, George Wester
‘man, and Nils Fonstad, “Aligning IT Architecture with Organizational
Realities,” MIT Sloan School of Management Center for Information Sys
lems Research, Research Briefing, vol, 3, no, LA (March 2003); Timothy
R. Kayworth, Debabroto Chatterjee, and V. Sambamurthy, “Theoretical

Notes 2s1

Justification for TP Infrastructure Investments," Information Resources
Management Journal 14, no, 3 (2001): 5-14; and Peter Weill, Mani Subra-
Mani, and Marianne Broadbent, “tuilding IT Infrastructure for Strategic
Agility,” MIT Sloan Management Review 44, no. 1 (2002): 57-65. The bot-
tom line is estimated from statistically significant correlations of three-
year adjusted performance of eighty-seven firms in our study,

9. The description of Plizer’s IT governance was drawn [rom inter
views conducted by George Westerman and Jeanne Ross with four Pizer
IT executives between October 10 and October 21, 2002,

10. ‘The State Street Corporation case stully was based on Richard
Woodham: and Peter Weill, “State Street Corporation: Evolving IT Gover-
nance,” working paper 327, MIT Sloan School of Management Center
for Information Systems Research, April 2002; David Spina (State Street
Corporation), “State Street Highlights Growth Strategy” at company’s
annual meeting, 18 April 2001; interviews with senior State Street execu-
lives; and published financial statements,

11. Richard Woodham and Peter Weill, “State Street Corporation:
Evolving IT Governance," working paper $27, MIT Sloan School of Man-
agement Center far Information Systems Research, Apeil 2002.

12, Ibid,

13, Based on a conversation between Peter Weill and State Street Cor
Poration CIO Joe Antonellis at MIT on 22 January 2003.

Chapter 7

1, The MPS-Scotland Yatel case study is adapted from Marianne
Broadbent and Peter Weill, “Effective IT Govemance. By Design,” Gart-
her EXP Premier Report, January 2003 and Peter Weill and Marianne
Broadbent, “Describing and Assessing IT Governance—The Governance
Arrangements Matrix” MIT Sloan School of Management, Center for
Information Systems Research, Research Briefing, vol. il, no. 3, October
2002

2, Weill and Broadbent, “Describing and Assessing IT’ Governance—
The Govemance Arrangements Mattix.”

3. Broadbent and Weill, “iffective IP Governance, By Design.”

4. For Porter’s model, see Michael 1, Porter, Competitive Advantage:
Creating aed Sustaining Superior Performance (New York Free Press, 1985),

5. For more information, see Mark Moote, Creating Public Public
Value: Strategic Management in Government (Canibridge, MA: Haevard Uni-
versity Press, 1995), chapter 3. Sec also John Alford, "Towards a New Puh-
lic Management Model: Beyond Managerialism and Its Ctilies,” Aus:
tralian Journal of Public Administration $2, no, 2 June 1993}: 135-148,

--- PAGE 135 ---
Notes

6, John Alford, "Defining tie Client int the Public Sectors A Social Ex-
change Perspective,” Public Administration Review 62, no. 3 (2002): 337-346.

7, The TVA case study is adapted from Broadbent and Weill "Effec-
tive IT Governance. By Design.”

8. Interview with John Glaser conducted by Jeanne Ross and Sinan
Aral on June 24, 2002.

9. Paul Richardson, Peter Weill, and Joel B. Barolsky, “Barwon Water
(B): Creating and Exploiting an IT Infrastructure,” case 386 Melbourne
Business School, University of Melbourne, 1999); and Paul Richardson,
Peter Weill, and Joel B. Barolsky, "Barwon Water (A): Creating and Ex
ploiting an IT Infrastructure (A Case Study of the Geelong and District
Water Board and Their Innovative Approach to IT Intrastructure),? case
385 Melbourne Business School, University of Melbourne 1999).

10. Richardson, Weill, and Barolsky, “Barwon Water (B): Creating and
Exploiting an IT Infrastructure.”

11. Governance performance was detecmined by the CIO and is a
fouractor measure of IT including cost-effective use of IT, use of IT for
growth, use of IT for asset utilization, and use of IT for business flexibil-
ity. Fach factor is weighted for importance to the organization to create
score ranging from 20 to 100.

12, Determined by statistically significant correlations between gov-
ernance arrangements and governance performance as defined in the
previous endnote,

13. “Lwant the U.K. to be the world’s leading Internet economy, ... 1
am determined that government should play its part, so Lam bringing
forward our target for getting all government services online from 2008
19 2005. This will mean that people and businesses will be able to access
government services twenty-four hours a day, seven days a week.” U.K.
Prime Minister Tony Blair, 30 March 2000.

14. All the mechanisms mentioned in this section were statistically
significantly used more effectively by top governance performers,

15. ‘The UNICEF case study was drawn from discussions between
Peter Weill and UNICEF ClO Andre Spatz; material adapted from Broad:
bent and Weill, “Effective [T Governance. By Design”; and wewamnicet org,

16. Source: www.unicet.org.

19. Broadbent and Weill, “Elfective IT Governance. By Design.” Used
with permission,

Chapter 8

1. Many of the examples in this section are further descriptions
or summaries of examples in earlier chapters where the sources are
identified,

Notes, 283

2. Marianne Broadbent and Peter Weill, "Effective IT Govemance.
By Design,” Gartner EXP Premier Report, January 2003, p. 60.

3. Quotation from video of interview with Mike Eskew, Chairman
and CEO of UPS, discussing IT governance and investment with Jeanne
Ross and Peter Weill, MIT Sloan School of Management School Center
for Information Systems Research, February 2002 MIT Sloan School of
‘Management.

4. Asurvey taken by one of the authors using an audience response
system at a meeting of fifty CIOs in May 2003 found the following pat-
ters of IT governance ownership: ClOs 56 percent, CEOs 8 percent,
COOs 13 percent, committee of senior IT leaders 3 percent, committee of
senior business and IT leaders 13 percent,

5. This section draws heavily on the discussion at the MIT ClO Sum-
iit attended by twenty ClOs and CTOs on 22 May 2003, The diagram in,
figure 8-1 was jointly developed in a breakout session and then discussed
vith the entire group.

--- PAGE 136 ---
Index

Abbey National (UK), 93-94
accountability
assigning of, 227-228
of CIOs, 228,
catifying, 116
IPmetries and, 148, 154
at MPS-Scotland Yard, 189
accounting, chargeback, 102-103,
174
Adamski, Joe, 197-198
aggregators/aygregation, 15-16
alignment processes for decision
making, 86
architectural exception, 99-101
Carlson Companies’, L12-LL4
chargeback accounting, 102-103
formal tacking of business
value, 103-104
IT investment approval, 97-99
project tracking, 103
service-level agreements (SLAs),
101-102,
Amazon.com, 219-220
anarchy model, 12, 59, 60, 63
Antonellis, Joe, 182
applications
coordination af development
ol, 56-187

255

Infrastructure, 37, 38
strategie IT, 40
archetypes. See also entries for each
specific model, eg, federal
model
anarchy model, 12, $9, 60, 63
business monarchy, 12, 58-39
duopoly madel, 12, 61-63
federal motel, 12, 61
feudal model, 12, 60
industry differences in use of, 81
IT monarchy, 12, 59-60
key players in, 60
architecture, 10
component-based, 34
cammiltees, 91-92, 99, 138
caprodaction and, 198-199
DBS Bank's, 76
for decision-making principles,
30-34
Delta Neevous System, $1
exceptions processes, 99-101,
i314
integrity of, 43
IWarchitecture and standards
infrastructure, 39
maintaining, in high-growth
firms, 142-143

--- PAGE 137 ---
236 IT GOVERNANCE

architecture (continued)
MetLife’s Enterprise
Architecture, 32
questions key for, 54
typical governance arrange-
ments far, 67
Asia-Pacific firms, 82
assessment
analytical tools, 164
of the ClO, 231-234
of business value, 103-104,
232-233,
how to assess governance,
119-121
‘measuting performance, 81,
120, 195-196, 239-240
of patterns across enterprises,
64-65, 70-78
assets
coordination of, 230-231
IV asset classes, 47
key asset governance,
relumns on assets (ROAS), Ld
utilization of, 136-139
audits of IT governance
mechanisms, 221
authorizing environments,
191-192, 194-195, 205-207

Heath, Cynthia, ix
Beaton, Ailsa, 186, 187, 190
behavioral side of corporate

governance, 9-10

benchmarks for governance
performance, 124

BIC Graphics Europe, 159

bicycle wheel duepolies, 62,
58-69

Bait, Tony, 204

Brady Corporation, 89-90

Broadbent, Marianne, ix
Brown, Steve, 110
business application needs
decisions, 11
feudal model for, 69, 75,
204-205,
questions key for,
typical governance arrange-
ments for, 68-69
business/IT interactions, 93-94
business/IT relationship
managets, 96-97, 138
business monarchy model
for application needs decisions,
CF
coordinating, with IT
monarchies, 92-93
decision-making structures,
86-89
for IT investinent and prioritiza.
lion decisions, 69-70
in top performers, 136-143
overview of, 58-63
for IT principles decisions,
65-66, 142.
use of, across industries
enterprises, 81-82
business objectives for IT
investment, 126-1
business performance. See
performance/performers
business process modularity,
234-235,
business unit autonomy and
synergy, 105, 70-174

Campbell Soup, 91-92,

Capital One, 164

Carlson Companies (Carlson),
108-114

Research Sites 2s7

case studies. See also entries far each
specific company, eg., UPS;
researchystudies
Carlson Companies (Carlson),
108-114
DBS Bank, 76-78
Delta Air Lines, 49-5
DuPont, 72-75
Motorola, 78-80
Slate Street Corporation, 1
UNICER, 206-214
Ups, 18-21
centralized approaches
to governance, 134, 140.
centrally managed IV, 15
UNICEF's, 210
challenges
to architectural integrity, 42-43
governance, 234-236
for governmentinot-for-profit
organizations, 195-200
changes
in designs, 223
ewer governanes
organizational, £4
problems of frequent gover
nance changes, 219-220
chargeback, 102-103, 174
Chase Manhattan Bank, 106
See also JPMorgan Chase
chechlist for designing
governance, 145-146
C10 offices, 106-107, 125, 126,
227-228, 231-234
Citibank, 15, 16
Citibank Asia, L40
Citicorp, 137-138
committees
architecture, 91-92, 99, 138
for communicating governance,
105-106, 125

183,

128

Integration Steering Committee
(USAS), 98
MPS-Scotland Yard's, 224
senior management, effective
use of, 140
structures of O4PS-Scotland
Yard), 186-187
use of, by Lop performers, 205
Commonwealth Bank of
Australia, 69, 96, LOL
communication approaches, 86
coordinating multiple
mechanisms, L08-114
formal committees, 195-106
office of CIO or IT governance,
106-107
senior management announce-
ments, 104-105, £25
tools (Carlson Companies), 114
‘Web-based portals, 107-108
sworking with nonconformists,
107
comparisons
governance versus manage
ment, 25, 220
localized versus enterprise goals,
99
not-for-profit versus for-profit
governance, 201-202
strategies versus behavior, 6,
154
‘component-based architecture, 34
constimers, types of, 199-200
contol, through IT governance,
20-21
coordination issues, 92-5
1OB-LLA
copraduction, 193, 198-199
corporate culture, 9, 71-72
corporate scanclals, 4
councils, [1, 93-94

--- PAGE 138 ---
258 IT GOVERNANCE

creativity, 40, 41-42
cross-functional business
processes, 94
culture, corporate, 9, 71-72
customers
authorizing environment of,
192, 206-207
consumers as, 199-200
‘customer intimacy, 158,
162-168
customer relationship manage-
ment (CRM) systems, 37
loyalty of, 230

data standardization, 31
DBS Bank, 76-78, 88, 107,
224-225
decentralized structures, 150
decision-making issues/structuces
‘See also alignment processes
for decision making: Interre-
lated TT decisions
better decision makers, 133-136
business monarchies, 86-89
Carlson Companies’, 110-112
decision rights, 59, 136
Delta Air Lines, 49-53
designing effective mechanisms
for, 115-116
desirable behaviors and,
153-154
duopolies, 93-97, 132-133
federal models, 89-90, 130-132
governance arrangements for,
130-136
for implementing governance,
1s16
in infrastructure strategies,
67-68
IT monarchies, 90-93
joint, for IT investments, 205

key IT governance decisions, 27
‘mechanisms for, 217-218
overlapping membership in,

us
power of CxOs for, 81
processes for successful firms, 17
speed of decision making, 235
successful patterns of, 133-134
top-down decision making, 26
Delta Air Lines, 49-53, 54, 105,
217
descriptions of IT governance by
Teaders, 124

design issues/design frameworks

active designing of governance,
222-223

checklist for, 145-146

comparisons for design, 83

components of effective,
148-157

coproduction design, 199

designing at multiple organiza-
tional levels, 228

design proposal for linking cor
porate and IT governance, 5-6

of governance arrangements,
152

IT Governance Design Frame-
work, 13, 220, 221

JPMorgan Chase's, 151

leading enterprises’ governance
designs, 145-146

MPS-Scotland Yard's, 188

principles for effective
mechanisms, 115-116

redesigning, timing of, 223,
219-220

risks of designs, 157-158

steps for reviewing/designing IT
governance, 220-221

strategic and structural drivers,
designing for, 183-184

j

Research Sites 259

typical design profiles, 83
UNICEF's, 209
desirable behaviors, 6, 8-9, 148,
153-154, 181-182, 183-184
differences among enterprises,
71-72, 80-82
disciplined execution of decisions,
42-45
disciplines, value. See value
disciplines
disincentives, financial 224-225
diversity, of enterprises, 71
documentation, 125, 229
Dow Corning, 69, $8, 105, 138
duopoly model, 12, 59, 69
for architecture decisions, 6?
by leaders on asset utilization,
137-138,
bicycle wheel duopolies, 62
decision making in, 93-97
enterprise objectives and, 68-69
for investment decisions, 70
for IT principles decisions,
65-66
overview of, 61-63
reasons for success in decision
making of, 132-133
T-shaped duopolies, 62, 65, 70,
134, 137-138
use of across industries;
enterprises, 81-82
DuPont, 60, 72-75, 168, 169

© business initiatives, 20
education and training, 39,
1-230
ellectiveness
of architecture exception
Process, 100-101
assessing IT governance,
119-121

components of effective design,
148-157
design principles for effective
mechanisms, 15-116
documentation, 229
of duopolies, 97
effective IT governance as pre-
dictor of value, 2-4
experience of IT governance
and, 71
ineffective IT governance,
216-220
of principles, 28,
questions to address for, 10
e-government innovations,
203-204
empowerment, 20-21, 104
enterprises. See alse by naines of
specific enterprises, e.., UPS
architectures vf, 31-34, 52
corporate governance, 5

castomer-intimate, 164

enterprise-level governance,
115-116

enterprise resource planning
(ERP) systems, 17, 27-28, 34,
41, 138

factors in, 71

high-growth, 142-143

Ieading, governance designs of,
145-146

operationally excellent, 159

pattern analysis across, 70-78

product leadership, 168

strategy and organization of,
148, 149-152

top not-for-profit versus other

not-for-profit governance,

202-203,

spical IT governance in, 64-70

variations in governance across,
122-123

--- PAGE 139 ---
260) IT GOVERNANCE

equity, 194
Escarta, Vicky, $1
Eskew, Mike, 224
evaluation. See assessment/analysis
evolving I governance, 184,
210-213,
exceptions
exceplion-handling processes,
99-L01, 113-114, 156,
225-226
renegade, 127-128
to normal policies, 17
expenditures, how much to
spend, 45-46
expenses of IT governance, 14-15
experiments, 41-42

facilities management, 38
failure rates of IT projects, 17
Federal Express (FedEx), 4546,
164
federal model, 12, 59, 60, 61
toc application needs, 133-134
decision-making structures,
89-90
for investment and prioritiza-
tion decisions, 68-69
for IT’ principles decisions, 65-66
reasons for struggling with,
130-132
Use of, across industries?
eniterprises, 81-82
Feld, Chattie, 50
feudal model, 12, 59, 60, 142.
for business application needs,
69, 204-21
DuPont's use of, 77
use of, across industries!
enterprises, 82
financial assets, 6

financial disincentives, 224-225
Fiore, John, 178
firms. See enterprises
Fonstad, Nils, ix
formal committees, 105-106
formal tracking of business value,
103-104 ;
for-profit organizations, 81,
192-193, 201, 202. See aiso
government/not-for-proft
organizations
frameworks, 160, 190-195.
See also design issuesidesign
frameworks
funding, 197, 200, 206-207
future challenges of IT
governance, 234-236

Glaser, John, 197
goals
alignment of IT decisions with
organizational, 112
business performance
GPMorgan Chase's), 153
localized versus enterprise, 99,
170-174
strategic and performance, 71
governance. See also IT governance
characteristics of leading
enterprises, 145-146
corporate, 4-7
of government/not-for-profit
organizations, 200-202
versus management, 25
governance arrangements
for architecture decisions, 67
best governance arrangements,
129-136
for business application needs,
68-69

Research Sites 261

industcy and regional
differences, 80-82
{for infrastructure strategy
decisions, 67-68
for investment and prioritiza-
tion decisions, 69-70
of large enterprises, 89
leading financial performers’
approaches, 136-145,
matrixes, 10-14, 73, 189, 2L1
for principles decisions, 65-67
Governance Arrangements
Mateix, 10-14, 224
Caclson’s, 113
DBS Bank's, 77
DuPont's, 74
Motorola's, 79
MPS-Scotland Yard's, 189
State Street Corporation's, 180
UNICEF's, 211
governance design. See design
Issues/design frameworks
Governiance Design Framework,
13-14, 148-157
ING Direct's, 163
JPMorgan Chase's, 150
MPS-Scolland Yard's, 188
Panalpina’s, 166
State Street's, 179
UNICEF's, 209
governance mechanisms. See also
by specific mechanism (e..,
committees, chargeback)
across key assets, 230-231
common, 87
coordinating multiple, 108-114
design principles for effective,
11S-116
high-impact, 109
not-for-profit organizations,
205-206

organizational, 7
overviews of, 85-86, 155-157
principles for, 114-116
slowjcontradictory, 217-218

governance performance survey,

239-240
government/not-for-profit
organizations, 81
challenges of governance for,
195-200
compared to for-profits, 214
framework for value in,
190-195
governance of, 200-202
‘Metropolitan Police Service
(MPS}-Scotland Yard,
186-190
overview of, 185,
top performers, governance of,
202-206
UNICEE, 206-214
growth, leaders on, 141-145
guidelines, for good corporate
governance, 4-5

Halbert, Keith, $3
Handy, Charles, 61

Harrison, William, Jr, 149-150
high-growth enterprises, 142-143
high-impact mechanisms, 109
human assets, 6

incentives, management, 226-227

industry differences, 71-72, 80-82

ineffective IT governance, symp-
toms of, 216-220

information assets, 6-7

information security governance
(Motorola's), 78-80

--- PAGE 140 ---
262 IP GOVERNANCE

infrastructures, 10
cost-saving, 198
decision making on, 26, 34-40
investments in, 196-198
questions key for, 55
as strategic business decisions,
204
typical governance arrange-
ments for, 67-68
ING Direct, 88, 159, 161-162,
163
innovations, 9, 203-204
input to governance decisions,
64-65, 129-130
integration,
of formerly autonomous
functions, 105
of infrastructures, 37
process, 30-31
providing integrated solutions,
150
intellectual property (IT) assets, 6
interactions, business/f1, 93-94
intertelated IT decisions. See also
decision-making issuesf
structures
Decision 1: IT principles, 27-30
Decision 2: IT architecture,
30-34
Decision 3: IT infrastructure,
34-40
Decision 4: business applica:
tions needs, 40-45
Decision &: investment and
prioritization, 45-49
linking, 54-55
overview, 26-27
intranets, 125
investment and prioritization, 11
decision-making principles,
45-57
questions key

ot, St

lypieal governance arcange-
ments for, 69-70
investment portfolios, 46-47
IT councils, 93-94
IT governance. See also governance
call to action for, 22
concepts of, 10-14
definitions of, 2, 8-10
empowerment and control
Uhrough, 20-21
importance of, vit-vill, 14-18
research on, vili-x
steps for reviewing/designing,
220-221
symptoms of ineffective,
216-220
tr monarehy, 75, 90-93,
for architecture decisions, 67
coordinating, with business
monarchies, 92-93
decision-making structures,
90-92
for infrasteucture decisions,
67-68
for IT investment and prioritiza-
tion decisions, 69
for leaders on profit, 139-141
overview of, 58-63
for IT principles decisions, 65-66
use of, acrass industries?
enterprises, 81-1
IT principles, 10
decision making on, 27
185-136
questions key for, $4
typical governance arrange:
ments for, 65-67

Johnson & Johnson, 67-68
joint business/IT membership,
93-94

Research Sites 263

joint decision making, 203-204,
205

JPMorgan Chase (formerly Chase
Manhattan Bank), 104, 106,
149-158, 169, 228

Lacy, Ken, 40, 224

leadership, 90-91, 159, 222-231
See also managers

leading financial performers
See under performance]
performers

Levina, Natalia, ix

Logan, Hal, 143

management
of assets, 1
centrally managed (1, 15
change, 44-45
facilities, 38
versus governance, 25, 220
of information/inowledge,
213-214
paradox of, 236
principles for addressing steate-
gic objectives, 183-184
services, 39)
managers
better decision making of, 135
business/IT relationship, 96-97,
138
senior, 17, 124-126, 216-217,
218, 223-224
Manheim Auctions, 143-144
matrixes. See governance arrange:
mentsfmatrixes
MeadWestvaca, 27-28, 29-30,
42-43, 94-96, 138, 159
measuring performance, 81, 120,
195-196, 239-240. See also

assessmnent/analysis;
performanceperformers

mechanisms. See governance
mechanisms

Metlife, 28-30, 31-34

metrics and accountabilities, 148,
154, 182, 183, 233

‘Metropolitan Police Service
(MPS}-Scotland Yard,
186-190, 193

models. See archetypes

monarchy model, See archetypes;
business anonarchies; 7
monarchy

Motorola, 78-80, 129, 168, 169

Mullin, Leo, 49-53

multiple organizational levels,
118, 228

Nelson, Marilyn Carlson, 110

Nelson, Oz, 18-19

net asset values (NAVS), 182

new information technalagies,
15-16

nocmative side of corporate
governance, 10

not-for-profit organizations, See
government/not-for-profit
organizations

objectives, business, 68-69,
126-127, 183-184

“OECD Principles for Corporate
Governance,” 4-5

Old Mutual South Africa (OSMA),
90, 91, 224-225

online businesses, 143-144,
203-204

‘operational excellence, 158,
459-162

--- PAGE 141 ---
264 IT GOVERNANCE

ocganization, enterprise strategy
and, 149-1

organizational leaning, about IT
value, 16-17

Organization for Economic Coop-
eration and Development
(OECD), 4-5, 9-10

outsourcing, 35, 219, 235,

ownership, assigning of, 227-228,

Panalpina, 164, 165-168
Partners Healtheare, 41

patterns
analysis of, across enterprises,
64-65, 70-78

factors in, 71
of penformance, successful
133-134
bf lop performers, 136
variations in governance, 71-72
performance/performers
assessing governance, 119-121
Ddest/seorst, 131
business performance goals,
148, 153,
calculating, 240
leading financial performers,
136-145, 145-146, 176-177
measuring performance, 81,
195-196, 239-240
patterns of performance,
successful, 133-134
top governance performers,
123-128, 129-130, 133,
203-205, 205-206
Pfizer, 168, 169, 172-173,
political acceptance, 194-195
political archetypes. See
archetypes
political power holders, 206-207

portals, Web-based, 107-108, 125,
29
Porter, Michael, 190-195
portfolios, 46-47
predictors of top gov
performance, 123-128
Price, Mark, 110-111, 113
principles, 10 See also IT principles
for addressing strategic
objectives, 183-184
Jor chovsing optimal I

governance, 146
for designing effective
mechanisms, 114-116
leadership, 222-231
“OECD Principles for Corporate
Governance,” 4-5
prioritization, See investment and
peioritization
problems
in aligning business and IT, 97
of governing IT by default, 3
inability to respond to
technology-induced market,
16
IT failure rates, 17
of mismatches between
desirable behavior and
governance, 8-9
outsourcing of, 67
symptoms of ineffective
governance, 216-220
proceduses, documentation of, 125
processes. See also alignment
processes for decision making
architecture exceptions, 99-101,
MEAL
business process modulacity,
234-235,
cross-functional, 94
exception-handling, 225-226

Research Sites 265

governance/ownership, 212
integration of, 30-31

process organizations, 94-96

product (or service) leadership,
159, 168-170

profits, leaders on, 139-141

public goods and services, 194,
207-208

public value of not-for-profit,
organizations, 193-195

questions

address for effectiveness, 10

architecture, 54

business application needs, $$

choosing optimal IT gover-
nance, 119, 145-146

for each IT decision, 54

for effective governance, 25-26,
21s

for IT infrastructures, $8

«ealization, benefits management
and, 189
redesigning, timing of, 223
regional dilferences, 71-72
regional differences among
enterprises, 80-82
relationships.
among assets, 7
business/IT relationship
managers, 96-97, 138
customer relationship manage:
ment (CRM) systems, 37
strautegy-governance, 174-17
research sluis. See alsa case
studies
entexprises with superior cozpo-
rate govemance, 22

IY governance, viti-x
premiums paid, 4
research sites, 237-238
value creation, 3-4
returns on assets (ROAS), Ld,
136-139
returns on investments (ROIs), 2,
139-141
reviewing and designing IT gover~
nance, steps for, 220-221
tisk factors.
in business investment
decisions, 47
frustration levels and, 66-67
security and risk capability
issues, 37-38
Robertson, David, ix

scandals, corporate, 4
Schneider National, 68
security issues, 77
senior management, 17, 223-224.
See also managers
announcements by, 104-105,
125
engagement/involvement of,
124-126
of not-for-profit organizations,
205-206
selective outsourcing by, 219
sensing of low value by, 216-217
understanding of IT governance
by, 218, 229-230
use of committees by, 140
services
in clusters, 38
infrastructure, 35, 37
outsourcing of, 235
service-level agreements (SLAs),
101-102

--- PAGE 142 ---
266 IT GOVERNANG!

service (or product) leadership,
159
shared infrastructures, 177-178
single business unit firms, 134
six sigma 104
Spatz, Andre, 210
Spina, David, 3, 176, 177, 182
standards/standardization
centralized approaches for, 140
and exception requests, 100-101
exceptions to, 128
IW architecture and standards
infrastructure, 39
process standardization, 31
types of, 170-171
State Street Corporation, 48-49,
58, 100, 175-183, 224
steps for reviewing/designing Tl
governance, 220-221
stewardship model, 94-95
strategic and structural drivers,
158-170, 183-184
strategie IT applications, 40
strategic objectives, principles for
addressing, 183-184
strategic priorities, 48-49
strategies
bacriers to implementing new:
2u7
versus behavior, for value
creation, 6
business unit synergies,
170-174
customer intimacy, 158,
162-168
differentiation of, 127
enterprise, 149-152
Infrastructure, 39-40, 67-68
linking components of gover-
nance design, 148-158
operational excellence, 158,
159-161

product (or service) leadership,
159, 168-170
strategy-governance relation-
ship, 174-175
structural drivers. See strategic and
structural drivers
structures. See also centralized
approaches; decision-making
issues/structures
changing, 23
decentralized, 150
and desirable behaviors, L48,
153-154
duopoly, 138-139
organizational, 71, 183-184
Subramani, Mani, ix
decision-making processes for, 17
indicators of, 46
reasons fos, 2, 132-133
successful patterns of decision
making, 133-134
supply chain management (SCM)
systems, 37
surveys, governance performance
survey, 239-240
synergies, 170-174, 17:

teams, 74, 89-90
contribution to business value
of, 233
leadership, 90-91
senior management, L47
Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA),
96, 195-196, 222
top-down decision making, 26
top performers. See also perform.
ance/performers
characteristics of, 123-128
designing governance from,
145-146

i
i
i

Research Sites 267

governance of, 18, 202-206
leading Snancial performers,
136-145, 176-177
predictors of, 124
reasons for success of, 2
top three governance patterns,
133,
tracking of business value,
103-105
transfers and provisions of
services, 194-195
transformations. See changes
transparency in governance,18,
115, 229-230
Treacy, Michael, 158
trends in IT governance, 234-236
‘T-shaped duopolies, 62, 65, 70,
134, 137-138

UNICEE, 206-214

UPS (United Parcel Service),
18-21, 42, 45-46, 59, 88-89,
98, 131-132, 159

USAA, 98, 164

value
business, 232-233
creation, 3-4, 6, 41, 44,
153-154, 208

framework for, in not-for-profit,
organizations, 190-195
from investment decisions,
ensuring of, 69-70
of IErelated initiatives, 16-17
low, from IT investments,
216-217
measuring, 195-196
tracking of business, 103-104
value disciplines
customer intimacy, 158,
162-168,
operational excellence, 158,
159-161
product (or secvice) leadership,
159, 168-170
relationship with governance,
174-175
Vanguard, 15, 16
Vitale, Michael, x

Web-based portals, 10:
229

‘Weirsems, Fred, 158

‘Westerman, George, Ix

Woodham, Richard, ix, x

108, 125,

Y2K, 50
Yodalee, 15

--- PAGE 143 ---
sii ii i

About the Authors

Peter Weill is Ditectos, MIT Sloan School of Management Center for
Information Systems Research (CISR) and MIT Sloan Senior Research,
Scientist. CISR’s mission is to perform practical empirical research on
how firms generate business value from information technology (IT).
ISR disseminates this research via electronic rescarch briefings, working
papers, research workshops, and executive education and is funded by
corporate sponsors and patrons. Peter joined the Sloan faculty in 2000 to
become director of CISR, which was founded in 1974. Peter's research
cente:s on the role, value, and governance of IT in enterprises. Peter has
published widely, including award-winning books, journal articles, and
case studies. Peter regularly advises corporations and governments on
issues of IT investment. Peter cowrote a best-selling book entitled Lever-
aging the New Infrastructure: How Market Leaders Capitalize on information
Technology, published by the Harvard Business School Press in 1998. Peter
cowrote another book for the Harvard Business School Press entitled
Place to Space: Migrating to e-Business Models, published in 2001, which
won one of the Library Journal of America’s awards for best business
ook of the year.

Jeanne W. Ross is Principal Research Scientist at the MIT Sloan School
of Management Center for Information Systems Research. At MIT she
lectures, conducts research, and teaches public and customized courses
on IT management. She has published widely, iricluding journal articles,
book chapters, and case studies. Her research examines organizational
and performance implications of enterprise initiatives related to IT archi-
tecture, govemance, and new IT management practices. Jeanne is a found-
ing senior editor of the recently created MISQ Executive.

269
