--- PAGE 1 ---
Don’t Just Lead, Govern:
How Top-Performing Firms Govern IT
Peter Weill
CISR WP No. 341 and MIT Sloan WP No. 4493-04
March 2004

--- PAGE 2 ---
OCR reconstruction from user-provided screenshots. The text has been extracted by OCR and may contain recognition errors; the original 
diagrams are preserved as embedded images.

--- PAGE 3 ---
CISR Working Paper No. 341 - Front Matter
CISR Working Paper No. 341
Title: Don’t Just Lead, Govern: How Top-Performing Firms Govern IT Author: Peter Weill
Date: March 2004
Abstract: Top-performing enterprises succeed in obtaining value from IT where others fail, in part, by implementing 
effective IT governance to support their strategies and institutionalize good practices. IT governance involves 
specifying decision rights and accountabilities for important IT decisions. The goal is to encourage “desirable 
behaviors” in the use of IT. In studying the IT governance of more than 250 enterprises in 23 countries, we found a 
wide array of IT governance arrangements. Enterprises assign “decision rights” to different “archetypes” (Business or 
IT Monarchy, Federal, Duopoly, Feudal, or Anarchy) to govern five key IT decisions (IT investment, architecture, 
principles, application needs, and infrastructure). Top-performing enterprises govern IT differently from each other 
and from average enterprises. Firms leading on growth decentralize more of their IT decision rights and place IT 
capabilities in the business units. Those leading on profit centralize more decision rights and senior business leaders 
make the major IT decisions. Top performers design their IT governance to reinforce their performance goals and link 
IT governance to the governance of their other key enterprise assets and desired behaviors. A case study of State 
Street Corporation illustrates IT governance evolution and a method to diagrammatically represent IT governance.
Key words: IT governance
21 Pages

--- PAGE 4 ---
Article page 1
Don’t Just Lead, Govern: How Top-Performing Firms Govern IT!
Peter Weill, Senior Research Scientist and Director, CISR MIT Sloan School of Management
Why Is IT Governance Important?
IT governance matters because it influences the benefits received from IT investments. Through a combination of 
practices (such as redesigned business processes and well-designed governance mechanisms) and appropriately 
matched IT investments, top-performing enterprises generate superior returns on their IT investments. One estimate is 
up to 40% greater return than their competitors for the same IT investment.”
These top-performing enterprises proactively seek value from IT in at least five ways: (1) they clarify business 
strategies and the role IT plays in achieving them, (2) they measure and manage the amount spent and the value 
received from IT, (3) they design organizational practices to fit IT to their business strategies, (4) they assign 
accountability for the organizational changes required to benefit from new IT capabilities, and (5) they learn from 
each implementation, becoming more adept at sharing and reusing IT assets.
In part, top-performing enterprises succeed where others fail by implementing effective IT governance to support 
their strategies and institutionalize good practices. To understand how IT value is created, we studied IT governance 
in 256 enterprises with multiple business units—in for-profit and not-for-profit enterprises —in 23 countries in the 
Americas, Europe and Asia Pacific (see Figure 1 for details). *
In addition to the correlation between firm performance and IT governance, we found that firms in the study with 
above-average IT governance performance that followed a specific strategy (such as customer
' This paper draws on: 1. Peter Weill and Jeanne W. Ross IT Governance: How Top Performers Manage IT Decision 
Rights for Superior Results, Harvard Business School Press, forthcoming 2004 and 2. Peter Weill and Richard 
Woodham, “Don’t Just Lead Govern: Implementing Effective IT Governance,” MIT Sloan School of Management, 
Center for Information Systems Research Working Paper #326, April 2002. The author would like to gratefully 
acknowledge all the Patrons and Sponsors of MIT Center for Information Systems Research (CISR) for making this 
research possible. In addition, thanks to a number of colleagues: Jeanne Ross, Susie Lee, Chris Foglia, Francisco 
Gonzalez-Meza Hoffmann, Richard Woodham from MIT, Marianne Broadbent and her Gartner colleagues, and 
Cynthia Beath, Ajit Kambil, Barbara McNurlin, and Bob Zmud.
? See: 1. Brynjolfsson, E., L. Hitt, et al. (2002). “Intangible assets: How the interaction of computers and 
organizational structures affects stocks market valuations,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity: 
Macroeconomics |: 137-199 and 2. Peter Weill and Marianne Broadbent, Leveraging the New Infrastructure: How 
market leaders capitalize on IT (Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Press, 1998), Chapter 3.
> This paper is derived from a series of research projects on IT governance led by Peter Weill at MIT Sloan Center 
for Information Systems Research (CISR): 1. In 2002, using an earlier version of the conceptual framework in this 
paper, we examined the IT governance and financial performance of 24 Fortune 100 firms using data provided by 
Concours Group. 2. In 2002, the CIOs at 256 enterprises in 23 countries spanning the Americas, Europe and Asia 
Pacific— mostly Gartner EXP members—completed a survey designed by CISR. More than 95% of the respondents 
were CIOs with 89% of the sample having enterprise-wide responsibility. The instrument is available from CISR — 
please email dfitz@mit.edu. Financial data from the 117 of those firms listed on US stock exchanges was used by 
CISR to analyze the relationship between IT governance and firm performance. 3. From 2001 to 2003, a series of 
detailed case studies of 20+ firms was conducted by Marianne Broadbent and her colleagues at Gartner, Jeanne Ross 
or Peter Weill. For example, see: Marianne Broadbent and Peter Weill, “Effective IT Governance. By Design,” 
January 2003 Gartner EXP Premier Report.
© 2004 Weill Page 5

--- PAGE 5 ---
Article page 2
intimacy) had more than 20% higher profitability’ than firms with poor governance following the same
strategy.
256 enterprises in 23 countries
SURVEY PARTICIPANTS BY INDUSTRY SURVEY PRRTICPONT BYORGANIZATION TYPE 4% Noblis ted 
Tek os . . {Private hel Listed ( Public aly , held) , 17% Not-f or-Prof it 24% Subsdary Ret ai Ma nuf ac tur ing 18% 
22% Gov ernment * Media 27% 4% Logistics‘Tr ans 4% Profess SURVEY PARTICIPANT S BY REGION Services 
os Gover nment* 20% Asial Pacific 11% Finan cial Ser vic es ie 18% Eun 43%
ray ny lori: CG.
CISR for facilitating and their CIO EXP
*in the Organization type chart, all governmental organizations are counted 8 y ie! members for completing our 
detailed questionnaire.
together. In the Industry type chart, governmental organizations are counted within an industry, i.e., utilities, if 
appropriate.
© 2003 Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Sloan Center for Information Systems Research. Used with 
permission.
Figure 1: Enterprises Studied by Survey
We define IT governance as specifying the framework for decision rights and accountabilities to
encourage desirable behavior in the use of IT.
A desirable behavior is one that is consistent with the organization’s mission, strategy, values, norms and culture, 
such as behavior promoting entrepreneurship, sharing and reuse or relentless cost reduction.
IT governance is not about what specific decisions are made. That is management. Rather, governance is about 
systematically determining who makes each type of decision (a decision right), who has input to a
‘ Profitability is measured by three-year industry-adjusted average return on assets (ROA). Governance performance 
is the effectiveness of governance, as assessed by the CIO, to deliver four IT objectives weighted by importance: cost 
effective use of IT, effective use of IT for asset utilization, revenue growth, and business flexibility.
> There are a number of other interesting definitions and sources of information on IT governance that are generally 
consistent in purpose with our definition, but they differ in form. For example, see the IT Governance Institute (www. 
itgi.org), which defines IT Governance as “A structure of relationships and processes to control the enterprise in order 
to achieve the enterprise’s goals by adding value while balancing risk versus return over IT and its processes.” This 
definition is from the IT Governance Institute’s “COBIT 3" Edition Executive Summary of July 2000.” The COBIT 
model describes the “control objectives” for 34 IT processes and the management guidelines and outcome measures 
for these processes. COBIT also proposes a five-stage maturity model of IT governance and a series of toolkits, audit 
guidelines, and education offerings to support use of the frameworks. The materials are detailed and comprehensive, 
and are very operationally focused around implementation and control. Another definition and perspective is by Wim 
Van Grembergen: “IT governance is the organizational capacity exercised by the Board, executive management, and 
IT management to control the formulation and implementation of IT strategy and in this way ensure the fusion of 
business and IT.” (Wim Van Grembergen, “Introduction to the minitrack: IT Governance and its mechanisms,” 35" 
HICSS conference http://computer.org/proceedings/hicss/1874/track8/187480242.pdf).
© 2004 Weill Page 2

--- PAGE 6 ---
Figure 1: Enterprises Studied by Survey


--- PAGE 7 ---
Article page 3
decision (an input right), and how these people (or groups) are held accountable for their role. Good IT governance 
draws on corporate governance principles to manage and use IT to achieve corporate performance goals. Effective IT 
governance encourages and leverages the ingenuity of all enterprise personnel in using IT, while ensuring compliance 
with the enterprise’s overall vision and principles. As a result, good IT governance can achieve a management 
paradox: simultaneously empowering and controlling.
All enterprises have IT governance. The difference is that enterprises with effective governance have actively 
designed a set of IT governance mechanisms (e.g., committees, budgeting processes, approvals, IT organizational 
structure, chargeback, etc.) that encourage behaviors consistent with the organization’s mission, strategy, values, 
norms and culture. In these enterprises, when the “desirable behaviors” change, IT governance also changes.
For example, David Spina, CEO of State Street Corporation, a world leader in global investor services, defined the 
firm’s corporate vision in 2001 as “One State Street.” This vision shifted the orientation of the enterprise from 
business units (such as investment research and management, trading and brokerage services, fund accounting and 
custodial services) to a customer orientation. The goal was to make organizational lines invisible to customers. Thus, 
desirable behaviors shifted to optimizing enterprisewide as well as business-unit objectives. State Street established 
and refined a set of governance mechanisms, including enterprise-wide IT budgeting and an Office of IT 
Architecture, to encourage these new behaviors.° We will return to the case study of State Street Corporation in a 
later section.
IT governance cannot be considered in isolation because it links to the governance of other key enterprise assets (such 
as financial, human, intellectual property, etc.). Governance of the key assets, in turn, links to enterprise governance 
and desirable behaviors.
The stimulus to study IT governance came, in part, from two sources. First, we were motivated by the stock-market 
premiums given to firms with excellent corporate governance.’ We suspected a similar premium existed for excellent 
JT governance. Second, we believed that the relatively sophisticated financial governance in most enterprises could 
provide a good model for IT governance. CFOs don’t make every financial decision or sign every check. Instead they 
design governance to identify who can make financial decisions and how these people are held accountable. In 
addition, CFOs have tools to manage the investment portfolio, risk profile, cash flow, and leading and lagging 
indicators of
performance. The same approach can be applied to IT governance.
The Key IT Decisions and Archetypes for IT Governance
Managers make hundreds of decisions a week—some after careful analysis and others as part of their daily frenetic 
activity. Governance design and analysis requires stepping back from day-to-day decision making and focusing on 
identifying the fundamental decisions to be made and who should make them. We propose that large enterprises have 
five major IT decisions to make (see Figure 2) and use six
mutually exclusive governance archetypes (Figure 3) for making these decisions.
* Source: Peter Weill and Richard Woodham, “State Street Corporation: Evolving IT Governance,” Working Paper 
No. 327, MIT Sloan School Center for Information Systems Research, Cambridge, revised August 2002. ? Roberto 
Newell and Gregory Wilson, “A Premium for Good Governance” The McKinsey Quarterly, No. 3 (2002): 20-23.
© 2004 Weill Page 3

--- PAGE 8 ---
Article page 4
IT principles
IT architecture
High level statements about how IT is used in the business
An integrated set of technical choices to guide the organization in satisfying business needs. The architecture is a set 
of policies and rules for the use of IT and plots a migration path to the way business will be done (includes data, 
technology, and applications)
Strategies for the base foundation of budgeted-for IT
Davenport, Hammer & Metsisto 1989, Broadbent & Weill 1997
Keen 1995, Ross 2003
IT Keen 1989, Weill . capability (both technical and human), shared ns , infrastructu am = throughout the firm as 
reliable services, and centrally subramart op strategies coordinated (e.g., network, help desk, shared data) roadbent 
Business ies -
oe Specifying the business need for purchased or Earl 1993 application internally developed IT applications needs IT 
investment Decisions about how much and where to invest in IT Devaraj & Kohli and including project approvals 
and justification 2002, Ross &
techniques Beath 2002
prioritization
© 2003 Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Sloan Center for Information Systems Research. Used with 
permission.
Figure 2: Five Major IT Decisions
Each of these major IT decisions has been the subject of many articles and books. Rather than attempt to do justice to 
the details of each decision here, references to citations are provided in Figure 2 with details in the footnote.”
Drawing on work on corporate governance, state governance and information politics, we use political archetypes 
(monarchy, feudal, federal, duopoly, anarchy) to describe the combinations of people who have either decision rights 
or input rights to IT decisions.” Each of our six archetypes (described in Figure 3) can hold decision rights or input 
rights to each of the five key IT decisions. Governance can
(and should) be designed and assessed at several levels in a large enterprise, such as enterprise-wide, by
* For an overview see: 1. James D. McKeen and Heather A. Smith, Making IT Happen: Critical Issues in IT 
Management (Chichester, West Sussex, England: Wiley, 2003). 2. Robert W. Zmud, ed., Framing the Domains of IT 
Management: Projecting the Future... Through the Past (Cincinnati: Pinnaflex, 2000).
* 1. Principles: a. Thomas H. Davenport, Michael Hammer and Tauno J. Metsisto, “How Executives Can Shape their 
Company’s Information Systems.” Harvard Business Review, March-April 1989, 130-134. b. M. Broadbent and 
P.Weill, “Management by Maxim: How business and IT managers can create IT infrastructures,” S/oan Management 
Review, Vol. 38, No. 3, Spring 1997, pp. 77-92; 2. Architecture: a. Peter G.W. Keen, Every Manager's Guide to 
Information Technology. 2nd Edition, Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Press, 1995. b. Jeanne Ross “Creating a 
Strategic IT Architecture Competency: Learning in Stages,” MISQE, Vol. 2, No.1, March 2003; 3. Infrastructure 
Strategies: a. Peter G.W. Keen, Shaping the Future: Business Design Through Information Technology, Harvard 
Business School Press, Cambridge, MA, 1991; b. Peter Weill, Mani Subramani and Marianne Broadbent “Building 
IT Infrastructure for Strategic Agility,” Sloan Management Review, Vol. 44, No 1 (Fall 2002), pp. 57-65; 4. 
Application Needs: M.J. Earl, “Experiences in Strategic Information Systems Planning,” M/S Quarterly, 17 (1993), 
pp. 124; 5. IT Investment and Prioritization: a. Sarv Devaraj and Rajiv Kohli, The /T Payoff: Measuring the Business 
Value of IT Investments , FT Prentice Hall, New Jersey USA, 2002; b. Jeanne W. Ross and Cynthia M. Beath, 
“Beyond the Business Case: New Approaches to IT Investment,” M/T Sloan Management Review, Vol. 43 No. 2 
(Winter 2002), pp. 51-59.

--- PAGE 9 ---
'© For an excellent discussion of the political perspective and the source of several of these archetypes, see Chapter 5 
of T. Davenport and L. Prusak, /nformation Ecology: Mastering the information and knowledge environment, Oxford 
University Press,
1997,
© 2004 Weill Page 4

--- PAGE 10 ---
Figure 2: Five Major IT Decisions


--- PAGE 11 ---
Figure 3: IT Governance Archetypes


--- PAGE 12 ---
Article page 5
business unit, and perhaps by region or group of business units. This paper focuses on enterprise-wide analysis, but 
the same approach can be used at other organizational levels.
2 & sos . . . ~ Decision rights or inputs rights £ fs eg gag . ws @ ESS SOF £ for a particular IT decision are held by: 
Yo so Ss fe) OK $F & g gD Sas a . A group of, or individual, business executives Business (i.e., CxOs). Includes 
committees comprised of v Monarchy senior business tives (may include CIO). Excludes IT executives acting 
independently. Individuals or groups of IT executives v Busi unit leaders, key pr: ‘sor v their delegates C level 
executives and at least one other v Vv business group (e.g., CxO and BU leaders)—IT v executives may be an 
additional participant. Equivalent to a try and its states working v v together. IT executives and one other group v v 
(e.g., CxO or BU leaders) v v Each individual user © 2003 Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Sloan Center for 
ion Systems Used with
Figure 3: IT Governance Archetypes
Business Monarchy
In a business monarchy, senior business executives make IT decisions affecting the entire enterprise. At State Street 
Corporation, the COO, CIO, chief administrative officer (CAO) and senior executives leading the various business 
units make up an executive committee. The CIO participates as an equal partner with the other leaders. The senior 
business executives (the CxOs or sometimes called the “C” level executives) make the IT decisions as a group.
Typically, business monarchies receive input for key decisions from many sources. For example, input for IT 
investment decisions at many enterprises, including State Street, come from: (i.) the CIO’s direct reports, (ii.) the 
business units, through the IT leadership team, (ili.) the enterprise-wide IT budget management process, (iv.) service 
level agreements and chargeback, and (v.) an activity tracking system showing all IT resources and how they are 
deployed.
IT Monarchy
In an IT monarchy, IT professionals make the IT decisions. At UPS, for example, the IT governance committee, 
which consists of senior IT managers, makes the strategic decisions that impact IT architecture.
Enterprises implement IT monarchies in many different ways, often involving IT professionals from both corporate 
teams and business units. DuPont has an enterprise IT architecture group with representatives
© 2004 Weill Page 5

--- PAGE 13 ---
Article page 6
from all regions, all strategic business units and all competency centers. This group proposes architecture “rules” to 
the senior IT management team, which consists of the corporate CIO and the ClOs of the largest business units. This 
team makes sure the rules make sense for the business, and it takes responsibility for enforcing architectural 
standards.
Feudal
The feudal model is based on the traditions of “merrie olde” England, where each prince and princess, or their 
designated knights, makes their own decisions to optimize their local needs. For IT governance, the feudal estate is 
typically the business unit, region or function. Overall, the feudal model in our study was not very common because 
most enterprises were looking for synergies across business units.
Federal
The federal decision-making model has a long tradition in government. Federal arrangements attempt to balance 
responsibilities and accountabilities of multiple governing bodies spanning at least two hierarchical tiers, such as 
country and states. Charles Handy and other management writers have identified the usefulness of the federal model 
in negotiating the interests of both the entire enterprise and individual business units."’
We define the federal model as coordinated decision making involving both a center and its business units (at least 
two levels of the business hierarchy). Business-unit representatives in a federal model can be either business unit 
leaders or business process owners, or both. IT leaders, either from business units or corporate, may also participate. 
In these cases, they add to the federal group, they do not take the place of one of the business groups.
The federal model is probably the most difficult archetype to use for decision making because enterprise leaders have 
different perspectives from business unit leaders. Enterprise-wide requirements can, and often do, clash with business 
unit requirements, requiring compromises to foster concurrence. In addition, incentive systems often focus managers’ 
attention on business unit results rather than enterprise results. The impact of shared resources on business unit 
performance—and specifically the transfer prices charged for those resources—typically raises concerns about 
fairness.
IT Duopoly
The IT duopoly is a two-party arrangement where decisions represent agreement between IT executives and one 
business group.” The IT executives may be any combination of IT groups. The business group is typically CxOs, 
business unit leaders or business process owners.
An IT duopoly always includes IT representation (one part of the duo) and business representation (the second part of 
the duo}—but only one group of business representatives in each duopoly (typically a business unit or the group 
CxOs). The federal arrangement always has two or more levels of the business
"| For an excellent discussion of the federal model of organizations, see Charles Handy, “Balancing Corporate Power: 
A New Federalist Paper,” Harvard Business Review, November—December 1992, pp. 59-72.
2 By duopoly, we mean “control or domination by two persons or groups” as defined by the Oxford English 
Dictionary, Second Edition 1989,
http://dictionary.oed.com/cgi/entry/00070944?single=1&query_type=word&queryword=duopoly &edition=2e&first= 
1 &max_to_ show=10 (accessed 30 May 2003).
© 2004 Weill Page 6

--- PAGE 14 ---
Article page 7
hierarchy involved, so it generally has both corporate and local business representation (typically more than one 
business unit).
Over a third of the 256 enterprises used IT duopolies to make decisions in the three less technical IT decisions: IT 
principles, business application needs and IT investments. The duopoly archetype is popular partly because it 
involves only two decision parties. Duopolies can achieve many of the objectives of a federal model using a simpler 
two-way rather than multi-way decision-making structure.
Similarly, an IT duopoly has the advantage over the feudal model that the central IT group is usually one of the few 
groups that sees the enterprise as a whole and can look for opportunities for sharing and reuse among business groups 
and business units. The IT professionals can also manage adherence to the enterprise’s IT architecture, either overtly 
or covertly.
IT duopolies often rely on relationship managers or business unit CIOs to represent business unit needs. A corporate 
IT group can have a duopoly with each different business unit (a hub and spoke model) enabling more tailored 
decisions in less time. Each of these duopolies also has the advantage of focusing directly on the needs of its business 
unit, resulting in higher business unit satisfaction. But having an IT duopoly with each business unit can be expensive 
and ineffective when organization-wide issues are being decided.
Anarchy
Within an anarchy, individuals or very small groups make their own decisions based only on their own needs. They 
differ from feudal decision makers in the size of their organization. Feudals speak for larger groups; anarchists speak 
for smaller groups, often only themselves.
Anarchies are the bane of many IT organizations because they go their own way, and they are expensive to support 
and make secure. Formally sanctioned anarchies were rare in our study. But they did exist, and were supported, where 
local or individual customers required very rapid IT responsiveness.
How Firms Govern IT
For the enterprise as a whole, we studied both who held decision rights and input rights for each of the five decisions. 
We then categorized the enterprise’s approach by archetype. Figure 4 shows three results. One, the numbers in the 
cells show the percentage of enterprises that used each governance archetype for each decision. The percentages in 
each column add to 100%. Two, to assist readability the darker shaded cells indicate the most common decision and 
input rights for each decision (the highest percentages in a column). Three, the cells with shaded borders show the 
most common decision rights.
© 2004 Weill Page 7

--- PAGE 15 ---
Article page 8
Decision Domain
Business IT Principles aan Application | IT Investment == Needs Most 0 6 0 common pattern for all firms.
columns add to 100%.
Q 10
> . 7 The numbers in £ 0 3 0 0 1 2 each cell are
2 percentages of ° 8 14°46 4 «59 6 aa
8 enterprises
5 istudied in 23
5 15 36 34 15 30 23 countries. The 3
[0]
© 2003 Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Sloan Center for ion Systems . Used with
Figure 4: How Do Enterprises Govern?
Input Rights
The most common input rights are broad-based (that is, they involved many people), while the decision rights are 
held by different groups for each decision. For the three more business-oriented IT decisions (i.e., IT principles, 
business application needs and IT investments), more than 80% of the enterprises use the federal model for input 
rights. Committees, budgets and cross-functional process teams provide the opportunities for input and feedback on 
these IT decisions. For the more technical IT decisions (IT architecture and infrastructure strategies), input rights vary 
more, at least at the enterprise level discussed in this paper. Duopoly is generally second most common to federal 
input rights.
In addition to collecting internal input for decisions, many firms also look externally. Vendors, business partners, 
consultants, industry associations, universities and other groups provide input. Compared to input processes, decision 
rights are much less uniformly managed across different enterprises.
Given the little variation in input rights, the rest of this paper focuses only on decision rights.
Decision Rights
For IT principles. \T principles set the strategic role for IT across the enterprise, and are decided in a variety of ways. 
Some 36% of the enterprises use a duopoly approach, although business and IT monarchies and federal approaches 
are also regularly used.
We suspect that duopolies (where business and IT are involved one-on-one) have gained favor in setting
IT principles because senior executives sense that they must take the lead to ensure that IT aligns with
© 2004 Weill Page 8

--- PAGE 16 ---
Figure 4: How Do Enterprises Govern?


--- PAGE 17 ---
Article page 9
business strategies. Working in partnership with IT leaders in the decision process establishes realistic expectations 
for IT and forces clarification of business strategy. A duopoly also secures the IT unit's commitment to business 
principles. Just as important, senior executives allow IT to shape business principles by reflecting IT capabilities 
already in place or under development in those principles.
For IT architecture. Over 70% of enterprises rely on IT monarchies to make IT architecture decisions, suggesting that 
senior business executives view architecture more as a technical issue than as a strategic business issue. Most 
enterprises attempt to consider business strategy in architecture decisions through their federal and duopoly input 
rights. However, the dominant decisi king role of IT in
decisions suggests that business managers feel unqualified, uninterested or unneeded—they are confident that IT 
professionals can translate IT principles into an architecture. IT professionals are typically quite
taking ility for archi decisions. At many of the enterprises we have studied, an IT-only team—often with IT 
representatives from numerous business units—is responsible for designing and managing the IT architecture, which 
the team then communicates to the entire enterprise.
For IT ii strategies. Like archi IT infrastructure strategy decisions are often made by IT only. Almost 60% of 
enterprises use IT monarchies to make infrastructure decisions. Johnson & Johnson’s Networking and Computing 
Services (NCS) unit, for instance, provides centralized infrastructure services for many of J&J’s operating units. 
However, because NCS must effectively sell its services to the operating companies, it is strongly influenced by the 
demands of its customers. At J&J, the IT staff at the operating companies most often articulate these demands. At 
many enterprises, however,
significant input comes from federal and duopoly arrangements.
Effective IT monarchies design infrastructures to anticipate and support the application requirements of business 
units. Well designed, the infrastructure enables the soon-to-be-needed applications. Poorly designed, the 
infrastructure is a frustrating barrier to the business units. Some enterprises involve business
leaders in these infrastructure decisions (e.g. duopoly) to make them more successful effectively reducing the risk to 
IT.
For business application needs. Firms choose the federal model to make business application needs decisions so that 
enterprise objectives are included in the process of deploying local applications. Using the federal model, for 
instance, a firm may decide either to replicate or customize enterprise-wide software for the local level. For example, 
one pharmaceutical firm purchased an ERP system for the entire enterprise. But, except for a small set of firm-wide 
data definitions (c.g. financial data), it did not standardize the application across its regional business units. Rather, 
the central ERP team developed a model, and then helped local teams configure the system to fit their unique needs. 
This arrangement allowed for shared expertise across the firm, but regarded the benefits of local customization more 
important than global standardization.
Business application needs are the only decision where a significant number of enterprises (18%) use a feudal model
—independent business units make their own decisions.
For IT investment and prioritization. Enterprises make IT investment and prioritization decisions using three 
archetypes about equally—business monarchy, federal and duopoly. These three offer different models of how 
enterprises aim to maximize the value of their IT investments. Business monarchies use
top-down decision making to implement a change in strategy. A federal model is typically used where
© 2004 Weill Page 9

--- PAGE 18 ---
Article page 10
agreement (or consensus) is needed between the center and the business units to achieve enterprise goals, for 
example, to balance flexibility of the business units with using standard practices across the enterprise.
Duopolies are used, for example, where bilateral decisions (between IT and each business unit ina hub and spoke 
model) satisfy the individual needs of the business units while they share IT services. In a duopoly, the IT group plays 
an important facilitating role, and consensus is typically not needed across the business units.
Only 9% of enterprises place IT investment decisions in the hands of IT professionals, which reflects the growing 
awareness that these decisions involve business tradeoffs. The business decision makers realize
they need to determine which business processes will receive IT support and which will not.
Patterns of IT Governance
Our study reveals some broad patterns of IT governance. For example, few enterprises govern IT using the anarchy or 
feudal approaches. We found that the variations in governance patterns result mainly from the following five factors:
1. Strategic and performance goal behaviors to achieve the enterprise’s strategic and performance goals.
Effective governance attempts to reinforce specific desirable
2. O jizati structure: T decision making with enterprise goals and strategies. However, as enterprises attempt to 
address
, enterprises have relied on organizational structure to align
goals, di rapid change and intense competition, organizational
structures have proven to be inadequate support for strategy. Enterprises now design governance to
compensate for the limitations of structure, in part, to require less change in structure as business needs change. For 
example, cross-regional committees can aim for greater standardization without
having to create a new organizational level in the enterprise.
3. Governance experience: Many enterprises are relatively early in the IT governance learning curve. As their 
experience increases, they change their IT governance.
4. Size and diversity: As enterprises grow and diversify—both ically and or y they introduce competing, and even 
conflicting, objectives. IT governance reflects these changes.
5. Industry and regional differences: Industry and regional differences create unique pressures on enterprises that are 
reflected in their IT governance. Decision-making cultures vary considerably across different regions of the world, 
often complicating governance in global enterprises. For example, the notfor-profit and sectors use signi more 
business for IT principles and IT investment than for-profit enterprises. This heavier use of business monarchies 
reflects the more
centralized decision-making processes in some types of government and not-for-profit enterprises (e.g., emergency 
response, taxation, defense, etc.)."*
An IT Governance Framework
One of the challenges in implementing good IT governance is describing and communicating it to IT and
non-IT personnel. The 256 CIOs surveyed reported that 38% of their “senior management colleagues in
'S Tables showing industry and regional differences among the enterprises in our study are available at the following 
website web.mit.edu/cisr/ITGovBookReferenceLinks.htm.
© 2004 Weill Page 10

--- PAGE 19 ---
Article page 11
leadership positions could accurately describe their IT governance.” This factor turns out to be the most important 
predictor (i.e., largest statistical correlation) of high governance performance. *
Segmenting the enterprises into top and bottom performers revealed big differences. Half the managers in the top 
50% of governance performers could describe governance while fewer than 30% of managers could do so in poorer 
performers. The higher the percentage of managers who can describe IT governance, the higher the governance 
performance. When more managers can accurately describe governance, it is more likely to be part of the enterprise’s 
management culture and thus followed—or better still—challenged and improved. Without awareness of IT 
governance, there is no chance it will be followed.
To aid in presenting, analyzing and icating IT , we developed the IT G
Arrangements Matrix, which is illustrated via a short case study of IT governance evolution at State Street 
Corporation.
Case Study: State Street Corporation
State Street Corporation is a world leader in financial services, providing investment services, investment 
management, trading and research to investment managers, corporations, mutual funds, pension funds, unions, for-
profit or; ions and individuals. As of March 2003, State Street had $7.9 trillion in assets under custody and $788 
billion in assets under management. Over 20,000 employees worked out of
22 countries serving clients in over 100 markets. From 1996 to 2002, State Street’s revenue and net income grew at a 
rate of over 15% a year. In 2002, State Street had total revenues of nearly $4 billion and net income of $719 million.
When David Spina became Chairman and CEO of State Street in January 2001, the world’s stock markets were in a 
prolonged slump and a series of structural changes were occurring in State Street’s core markets. These changes led 
State Street to focus on achieving greater returns from all assets, particularly from the IT investments crucial to State 
Street’s leadership position. Traditionally, State Street operated as a set of separate business units. But in response to 
these and other changes, David Spina articulated his client-focused vision of “One State Street.” At internal meetings 
during 2001, Spina explained: “You've heard me talk about ‘One State Street.’ That term describes how we must 
work together to serve our clients. When clients look at State Street, our organizational lines must be completely 
invisible, and behind this seamless face, we must have industrial-strength lines of communication connecting every 
part of the company.”
delivering “One State Street” required a single point of contact and consistent client view of State Street—to develop 
new business and to reduce time to market. State Street management believed shared IT infrastructure was important 
to enable this single point of contact. Historically, State Street’s IT organization had been highly decentralized. The 
CIO of State Street recognized the firm needed new IT governance to facilitate these changes. The new governance 
design is summarized in Figure 5.
' Governance performance is the effectiveness of governance assessed by the CIO to deliver four IT objectives 
weighted by importance: cost effective use of IT & effective use of IT for asset utilization, revenue growth, and 
business flexibility. Adding confidence to the measure, governance performance has statistically significant positive 
relationship with several three-yearaverage measures of industry-adjusted financial performance (i.e. ROE, market 
cap growth),
© 2004 Weill Page 11

--- PAGE 20 ---
Article page 12
Decision Domain
Most common patterns for all firms.
o 2 > 2 0 = ° = < o o £ S £ = o > ° co)
Governance Mechanisms:
mec Info Technology Executive Committee SLA ‘Service Delivery Agreements and ‘Chargeback Arch Office Office 
of Architecture TTORG Federated IT Organization Units) cio ClO Staff ‘etivity Tracking Activity Tracking System 
TLeaders IT Leadership Group Budgets Enterprise-Wide IT Budget Management Technology, Sloan Used with 
permission,
Figure 5: State Street Corporation’s IT Governance Arrangements Matrix
State Street’s new governance arrangement focuses on the firm’s requirements for customer intimacy and synergy 
across autonomous business units. A business monarchy makes IT principles and IT investment decisions. IT 
monarchies assume responsibility for the more technical IT decisions of infrastructure and architecture, receiving 
broad-based federal input for IT infrastructure. Business application decisions are made via a duopoly that includes 
business unit leaders, IT professionals from the business units (vertical IT groups), and IT shared services (horizontal 
IT groups). This model provides for both business-unit and enterprise-wide perspectives in IT governance decisions
The key mechanism for implementing State Street’s business monarchy is the IT Executive Committee (ITEC), 
comprised of the COO, CAO, CIO and senior executives from State Street’s various business units. ITEC is 
responsible for reviewing, analyzing and synthesizing the IT investment needs of individual business units to create 
an enterprise-wide IT budget. Once ITEC has decided on the list of projects, the IT organization tracks the allocation 
and use of the IT budget by project and business unit using an activity tracking system.
The IT monarchies for infrastructure and i rely on two. i the IT Leadership Group (ITLG) and the Office of. i The 
ITLG, of all senior busi it and corporate IT managers, defines IT strategy. The mission and methodology of the Office 
of Architecture have been
codified in a set of IT Architecture Principles, which link technology to the business.
© 2004 Weill Page 12

--- PAGE 21 ---
Figure 5: State Street Corporation’s IT Governance Arrangements Matrix


--- PAGE 22 ---
Article page 13
Early evidence suggested that State Street’s IT governance structure encouraged desirable behaviors. For example, 
testimonials from project managers indicated that the architectural review process helped deliver solutions more 
quickly because technology issues surfaced before they critically impacted projects. The shared infrastructure was 
evolving to address the joint needs of the businesses. These changes facilitated desirable behavior for “One State 
Street.” The IT governance structure enabled consolidation of the IT infrastructure, resulting in significant cost 
savings and cost avoidance, while still facilitating new offerings to clients, such as custom data marts.
This case illustrates good IT governance. Governance changed as State Street evolved from a set of independent 
business units to “One State Street,” and more recently to a firm operating in a period of a declining stock market. 
State Street has used IT governance explicitly to encourage the desirable behaviors needed to implement its strategies.
How Top Performers Govern IT
To understand how top performers govern IT, we identified two types of top performers: top IT governance 
performers and top financial performers.
Top IT governance performers are those firms where the CIO rates their IT governance as effective by
weighting delivery of four objectives by their to the enterpri 1. Cost effective use of IT
2. Effective use of IT for asset utilization
3. Effective use of IT for growth
4. Effective use of IT for business flexibility.'*
Top financial performers are those firms with high financial performance. Financial performance is assessed by 
comparing three-year averages of industry-adjusted measures of profit (ROE), growth (% change in revenue) and 
asset utilization (ROA).'°
© The que e asked CIOs about these 4 objectives: “How important are the following 4 outcomes of your IT 
governance, ona scale from 1 (Not Important) to 5 (Very Important)? The respondents then rated “what was the 
influence of the I governance in your business on the following 4 measures of success, on a scale from 1 (Not 
Successful) to 5 (Very Successful)? Using the following formula, a weighted average score for governance was 
calculated from a
Governance performance= Let 1} “influence of IT. 1h y*100 En=1 4 (S(importance of outcome))
Given there were four objectives, the maximum score is 100 and the minimum score is 20. The average score from 
256 enterprises was 69, with the top one-third enterprises scoring over 74.
"© These performance metrics were chosen to represent a basket of measures many firms seek to achieve. The 
following sources summarize many studies that measure firm performance that influenced our choice of measures and 
provide excellent references: 1 Noel Capon, John U. Farley and Scott Hoenig. “D of Financial AN
Seience, Vol. 36, No, 10 (1990), 1143-1159 (A focused issue on the state of the art in theory and method in strategy 
research); 2 David J-Ketchen Jr, James B. Thomas, Charles c Snow. “Special Research Forum: Configurational 
Approaches to Organization Comparison of Theoretical Approaches,” The Academy of Management Noonal, Vol 36, 
No.6 (December 1993), 1278 in 13; and 3. The Encyclopedia about Corporate Governance, 
http://www.encycogov.com.
© 2004 Weill Page 13

--- PAGE 23 ---
Article page 14
How Top IT Governance Performers Govern IT
Firms where the CIO rates IT governance performance highly typically use IT duopolies for both IT principles and 
investments.'’ These two decisions are the most strategic of the five key IT decisions. Principles set the role for IT in 
the enterprise and investments establish the level of commitment and priorities. IT duopolies work well for these 
decisions because they enable joint decision making between the business leaders and IT professionals, but remain 
focused on the specific and often local issues facing the business leaders. Some IT and business process standards 
may be nonnegotiable, but the IT duopoly approach allows for creative business solutions within agreed-upon 
constraints.
There are no dominant IT governance patterns exhibited by top governance performers for the other three decisions.
The poorer governance-performing enterprises typically use federal arrangements for their decision making. Many 
factors explain why federal models are less effective for decision making, including slower speed and a tendency to 
overly compromise and trade away effectiveness. Federal decision making often takes longer as more people and 
stages are involved, and there is less agreement on the objectives for the decisions. The long cycle times compound 
the problems faced by enterprises with poor governance. They continue to perform poorly until intervention occurs. 
Worse still, when compromises are made to “keep everybody happy,” neither the business units nor the enterprise 
achieves what is really needed.
While federal decision making is generally less effective, a few enterprises have its by establishing enterprise success 
as an important goal for all managers.
Federal decision making predicted poorer performance in all decisions except applications needs. For business 
application needs, the federal approach can work well if decision makers are rewarded for achieving both enterprise 
and business unit objectives and they can distinguish shared needs from unique application needs. The poorer 
governance-performing enterprises typically used feudal models for deciding their business application needs.
Three Effective IT Governance Patterns
We found significant variation in IT governance arrangements among the 256 firms. Each of the five key
IT decisions has a choice of six archetypes, yielding of possible The ten most popular combinations account for 25% 
of the enterprises. Within these ten, the three most effective arrangements, as measured by IT governance 
performance, are presented in Figure 6.
*7 Based on statistically significant correlations bet
governance performance and each archetype considered separately.
© 2004 Weill Page 14

--- PAGE 24 ---
Article page 15
@ @ ® Top Three Performers — iT
TTfor
Technol Center for Information
Figure 6: Top Three Overall Governance Performers
Arrangement I uses duopolies for principles and , IT ies for i and
architecture, and federal for business application needs. This arrangement requires IT groups that are finely tuned to 
business needs, with a strong level of trust between the business and IT. The federal model for application needs can 
capitalize on potential synergies (such as common customers) across business units.
2. Arrangement 2 is similar, using a duopoly for application needs and a business monarchy for investment. For 
enterprises with few synergies, using a duopoly for application needs can work well because there is less need to 
coordinate across business units. Arrangements | and 2 are both good starting points for enterprises balancing growth 
and profitability because the tensions of business units seeking to meet their local customer needs are nicely balanced 
with senior managers governing the IT investments.
3. Arrangement 3 is much more centralized, with business monarchies making all decisions except business 
application needs (which is federal). More centralized approaches are typically used in firms with single business 
units or where profitability or cost control is a predominant issue. Arrangement 3 requires business leaders who are 
interested and well-informed about IT issues—often the result of CIOs educating and working closely with the senior 
management team. Arrangement 3 is also sensible when major changes are occurring (e.g., mergers, major cost 
cutting, crises etc.) and decision rights must be tightly held.
Figure 6 illustrates how, in the three top performing patterns, the five decision-making approaches fit together to 
create a total governance design that is reinforcing and balances the tensions inherent in large enterprises. For 
example, an IT monarchy for IT architecture can be very effective if the architecture is
© 2004 Weill Page 15

--- PAGE 25 ---
Figure 6: Top Three Overall Governance Performers


--- PAGE 26 ---
Article page 16
guided by IT principles set by a business monarchy or a duopoly. The IT decision makers focus on creating an 
integrated and flexible IT arct guided by the business-driven IT principles set by the
senior leaders in the business monarchy. How Top Financial Performers Govern IT
For an enterprise to lead on one specific performance metric (asset utilization, profit or growth) requires
its focus and culture to single-mindedly pursue that goal. Firms that lead their industries in one of these metrics 
govern IT differently from the leaders on other metrics. They also govern differently from the most common 
governance patterns shown in Figure 4.'* And they govern differently from the top governance-performing 
enterprises (just described and shown in Figure 6), which aim for more balanced performance goals. These patterns 
for top financial performers are generalizations based on a combination of statistical and case analysis and thus are 
intended as indicative, not definitive.
Leaders on Asset Utilization
Leaders in asset utilization typically use IT duopoly governance for all five IT decisions. In the duopoly model, the IT 
group plays an important coordinating role because it is one of the few groups that interacts with all business units 
and can thus see firm-wide opportunities for sharing and reuse across business units, business processes and regions.
Firms wanting to lead on asset utilization can learn from these top performers and consider:
Setting IT principles with a strong flavor of asset utilization and using an IT duopoly consisting of CxOs and the 
corporate IT group.
« Empowering business/IT relationship managers who focus on achieving business value from IT in their business 
unit and leveraging the enterprise-wide infrastructure. In firms like DuPont, Campbell Soup Company and Marriott, 
business unit CIOs play the role of relationship manager.
«Establishing a technical core of infrastructure and architecture providers who plan and implement the enterprise’s 
technology platform and interact with the business/IT relationship managers.
¢ Involving IT architects on business unit projects to facilitate IT education of the business leaders and effective use 
of the shared infrastructure and architecture standards.
'§ The descriptions of governance archetypes for the top financial performers are based on statistically significant 
correlations between three-year industry-adjusted average financial performance and governance archetypes for each 
IT decision considered separately in 117 stock exchange listed firms in the study. The descriptions represent 
generalizations of how top performers govern IT. The bulleted points in the text that describe the characteristics of 
firms leading on the three performance metrics were derived from a combination of statistical analysis of their use of 
mechanisms and case study analysis. To generate the governance archetype patterns for the top financial performers, 
a number of assumptions were made. As a result, the patterns of top performers should be viewed as indicative only 
and not definitive evidence. Some of the assumptions include: 1. To compare across industries, we calculated relative 
firm performance by subtracting the three-year industry-average performance from the firm’s three-year average 
performance. We divided the result by the three-year industry-average performance, being careful to take into account 
industries with negative three-year averages. Like all approaches to industry adjustment, this analysis is not perfect 
but gives a good indication of industry-adjusted performance. The average annual percent change over the three years 
in each measure was also used in our analysis but not industry adjusted because the percent change is more readily 
compared from industry to industry. 2. In three instances, the for the correlations were slightly weaker than the 
usually accepted level for exploratory work, but they were consistent with the overall patterns for the performance 
metric and were supported by the case study analysis. 3. We claim no causality between governance pattern and 
financial performance, but we interpret the patterns as meaningful indicators. 4. There are many other factors that 
influence the financial performance other than IT governance that we did not consider.
© 2004 Weill Page 16

--- PAGE 27 ---
Article page 17
© Developing a simple chargeback system and a regular review process to help business unit leaders see the value of 
shared services.
Leaders on Profit
Enterprises leading on profit tend to have a more centralized IT governance approach. But that approach requires IT-
savvy business leaders (e.g. business monarchies) making the IT decisions on principles, architecture and 
investments. In these firms, the business architecture—that links key business processes
internally and to business partners ly—drives the high-level /7 i which is strictly
enforced. Leaders in profit make effective use of senior business management committees (involving the CIO) to 
achieve cost control and standardization.
For architecture, standardization occurs through business decision making, with the IT group providing
advice, IT ed and research. Bus s-driven d
limits costly to standard: but does not eliminate the importance of having an exception process to enable learning.
For infrastructure, leaders on profits used either business or IT monarchies, enabling the enterprise to specify 
centrally what IT can be shared.
Profit leaders use the federal archetype for business application needs. The federal archetype ensures consistency 
across the operational units via firm-wide strategies while recognizing differences among the business units. But the 
federal archetype requires a supportive incentive scheme for managers.
Firms wanting to lead on profitability can learn from top performers and consider:
¢ Staffing an enterprise-wide IT steering committee with capable business executives and the CIO, to set IT 
principles with a strong flavor of cost control.
e Carefully managing the firm’s IT and business architectures to drive out business costs.
© Designing a clear architecture exception process to minimize costly exceptions and enable learning.
e Creating a centralized IT organization designed to manage infrastructure, architecture and shared services.
Using linked IT investment and business needs processes that both make transparent and balance the needs of the 
center and the operational units. UPS, for example, uses a project charter process in which the teams managing its 
four key business processes initiate IT investment proposals. The senior management team then approves projects 
based on strategic, firm-wide priorities.
Implementing simple chargeback and service level agreement mechanisms to clearly allocate IT
expenses,
Leaders on Growth
Leaders in revenue growth have governance structures that strive to balance the dominant entrepreneurial needs of the 
operational units with the firm-wide business objectives. A business monarchy typically defines the IT principles, 
attempting to balance operational unit and firm-wide goals. These principles focus on growth and empower the 
operational units to be innovative and not too concerned about standardization—that can come later.
© 2004 Weill Page 17

--- PAGE 28 ---
Article page 18
IT investments are typically governed by either feudal or a business monarchy. In high-growth firms, the operational 
units typically drive growth by maintaining close contact with customers, anticipating and responding to their needs. 
The operational units often want and need feudal control over their IT investments to implement fast and to 
experiment with new products and services. Where more firm-wide synergies are desired (e.g., single point of 
customer contact across multiple business units or shared resources), business monarchies would be used for IT 
investment. Interestingly, there was no dominant governance approach for IT infrastructure strategies or architecture 
for high-growth enterprises. The key to fast growth is customer responsiveness, which often requires local fr IT arch 
in high th firms is chal ing. Many high. vth firms
report having a number of IT architectures rather than just one—perhaps equal to the number of
operational units! Corporate CIOs in high-growth firms rely heavily on personal relationships and one-onone 
influence with business and business-unit IT leaders.
In high-growth firms, business ies typically attempt to coordinate by identifying high-level business application 
needs. Demand for IT outstrips available IT resources, so the business leaders must specify the key business 
processes to receive IT resources that will distinguish the enterprise from its competitors.
Firms wanting to lead on growth can learn from top performers and consider:
« Empowering the business units to drive IT investment—often achieved by setting IT principles
with a strong flavor of innovation and market responsiveness.
Placing IT professionals into operational units to focus on meeting the unit’s internal and external customers” needs.
= Creating i it-based IT ilities tailored to local needs and linked into an often less-substantial enterprise-wide 
infrastructure.
e Enabling a technical core of infrastructure providers to identify critical integration requirements. They should be 
skilled at creating synergies and integrating affer systems are operational because the goal generally is to sacrifice 
integration for functionality and speed.
De:
To analyze IT governance, we suggest that managers map their enterprise’s current IT governance onto a
igning and Assessing IT Governance
matrix similar to Figure 5. Then subjectively assess whether or not IT governance is encouraging desirable behaviors 
for the enterprise’s performance goals. If not, use the appropriate top performers’ governance (top governance 
performer or top financial performer) as starting-point templates to create a new governance model that is then 
tailored to the enterprise’s culture, structure, strategy and goals. Use a diagram like Figure 5 to engage and 
communicate the IT governance with other enterprise leaders. Finally, in assessing or implementing governance, 
consider the following eight critical success factors.
Eight IT Governance Critical Success Factors
By combining our statistical analysis of the practices of top performers with the case studies, we identified the 
following eight factors as critical to effective IT governance:
© 2004 Weill Page 18

--- PAGE 29 ---
Article page 19
N
w
w
Transparency: Make each IT g i parent to all managers. The more IT decisions are made covertly and off-governance, 
the less confidence people will have in the structure and the less willing they will be to play by the rules, which are 
designed to increase enterprise-wide
performance. Actively designed: Many enterprises have created inated IT g isms. These mechanism “silos” result 
from by-default—introd isms one at a time to
address a particular need (e.g., architecture problems or over-spending or duplication). Patching problems as they 
arise is a defensive tactic that limits opportunities for strategic impact from IT. Instead, design IT governance around 
the enterprise’s objectives and performance goals, creating a coherent design that can be widely communicated.
Infrequently redesigned: Rethinking the entire IT governance design is a major undertaking, so it should be done 
infrequently and only when desirable behaviors change. Designing and implementing a new governance structure 
takes six or more months, and even more time for the organization to accept it and learn its use. A major change in 
strategy or a merger typically requires changing business governance because new desirable behaviors are sought. 
But changes in the economy or adjustments to strategy should not require a governance redesign. Only the types of 
decisions made within the existing governance arrangements need to be adjusted. For example, if an economic 
downturn results in an enterprise changing its governance arrangements, that change indicates that the governance 
structure was poorly designed in the first place, and needs attention. Education about IT governance: Education to 
help managers understand and use IT governance mechanisms is critical. Educated users of governance mechanisms 
are more likely to be accountable for the decisions they make and less likely to second-guess other decisions. They 
will not find themselves in the situation described at a major process manufacturing firm: “We have to re-justify our 
refresh strategy every year. That discussion should have been a 10-minute pitch, but we were in the room for 45 
minutes... The management committee turned into a team of volunteer architects trying to redesign cheaper 
desktops.” Education requires senior IT management investments, generally in time. “As a CIO, I invest a lot of my 
time in making governance work at all levels, to educate, coach, mentor and lobby,” says Andre Spatz, UNICEF’s 
CIO.
Simplicity: Effective governance arrangements are simple and attempt to reach a small number of performance goals. 
The more goals, the harder IT governance is to design and manage because each new goal often requires new 
governance mechanisms. And cach new goal can lead to different or conflicting desirable behaviors, which leads to 
confusion. Like business strategy, IT governance requires determining which performance goals, and thus which 
desirable behaviors, are most important. The most important should be designed into the governance structure. The 
rest can be left to an exception process.
An ion-handling process: i i forge new opportunities, some of which will not be supported by existing IT decisions. 
To support these opportunities, IT governance must include a clearly stated exception-handling process—to bring the 
issues out into the open, allow debate, and most importantly, foster organizational learning. Without an exception 
process, maverick unsanctioned exceptions will continue to occur, but with little enterprise-wide
© 2004 Weill Page 19

--- PAGE 30 ---
Article page 20
learning. UPS, the successful package-delivery and logistics firm, has a clear exception mechanism for its IT 
architecture and standards. Any exception to the IT architecture must be justified: the business champion and the 
architect each draft a one-page statement justifying the need for the exception—one from the business point of view, 
one from the technical viewpoint. If the two cannot agree, the issue is escalated through the IT architecture committee 
to the CIO, and eventually to the executive committee, if agreement cannot be reached. Through this process, each 
exception is openly debated on its merits. Provided that the business case is sound, the exception is granted. The 
exception is then placed on a list of technology initiatives outside the architecture that are continuously reviewed to 
determine whether any of them should be redeveloped according to UPS’s architecture standards. The strength of the 
UPS approach is that it allows the IT organization to effectively support new business that has unique systems 
requirements and does not fit neatly within UPS’s highly ized IT yy, if the market opportunity is large enough, the 
unique system requirements are brought into the core and made compliant with UPS standards
and architecture."
7. Governance designed at multiple organizational levels. In large multi-business-unit enterprises, IT governance is 
required at several levels. The suggested starting point is enterprise-wide IT governance, driven by a small number of 
enterprise-wide strategies and goals. Enterprises with different IT needs in divisions, business units or geographies 
require a separate but connected layer of IT governance for each entity. Many enterprises have IT governance at the 
enterprise, division or geography, and business unit levels. The lower levels of governance are influenced by, and 
sometimes connect to, mechanisms designed for higher levels. Assembling the governance arrangements matrixes for 
the multiple levels in an enterprise makes explicit the connections, common mechanisms and pressure points.
8. Aligned incentives. There has been so much written about incentive and reward systems in enterprises that we feel 
the topic is well covered and understood. Despite that level of understanding, acommon problem we have 
encountered in studying IT governance is the misalignment of incentive and reward systems with the behaviors the IT 
are designed to The typical concern is, “How can we expect the governance to work when the incentive and reward
systems are driving different behaviors?” This mismatch is bigger than an IT governance issue. Nonetheless, IT 
governance will be less effective when incentives and reward systems are not aligned.
In conclusion, we believe that leading an enterprise is only part of top management’s job. It is
necessary, but not sufficient, and sometimes does not sufficiently empower the rest of the enterprise. Top executives, 
including CIOs, need to govern as well. Good governance ensures that the right
groups are making the key IT decisions so that those decisions enable the desired goals and behaviors
of the enterprise. Good governance makes clear who can make decisions and how they are accountable for the 
enterprise goals. Good governance empowers the managers in the enterprise to make decisions without seeking 
additional senior management approval (where allowed by the
description of how UPS uses IT, see Jeanne
'® Jeanne Ross provides this description of UPS’ exception handling process. Fot R MIT Sloan School of 
Management, Center for
‘oss, “United Parcel Service: Delivering Packages and E-Commerce Solutio Information Systems Res rch Working 
Paper No. 318, 2001
© 2004 Weill Page 20

--- PAGE 31 ---
Article page 21
governance framework). An acid test of good IT governance is whether the CIO can leave the enterprise for a couple 
of months to perform due diligence on a potential merger and acquisition. While the CIO is away and not leading, 
will the governance work effectively or does it require the CIO’s leadership to function?
© 2004 Weill Page 21

--- PAGE 32 ---
About the MIT Sloan Center for Information Systems Research
About the MIT Sloan Center for Information Systems Research
MIT SLOAN CISR MISSION
MIT CISR was founded in 1974 and has a strong track record of practice-based research on the management of 
information technology. MIT CISR’s mission is to perform practical empirical research on how firms generate 
business value from IT. MIT CISR disseminates this research via electronic research briefings, working papers, 
research workshops and executive education. Our research portfolio includes but is not limited to the following 
topics:
IT Governance
Enterprise Architecture IT-Related Risk Management IT Portfolios and IT Savvy Operating Model
IT Management Oversight Business Models IT-Enabled Change
IT Innovation
Business Agility
The IT Engagement Models
In July of 2008, Jeanne W. Ross succeeded Peter Weill as the director of CISR. Peter Weill became chairman of 
CISR, with a focus on globalizing MIT CISR research and delivery. Drs. George Westerman, Stephanie L.Woerner, 
and Anne Quaadgras are full time CISR research scientists. MIT CISR is co-located with MIT Sloan’s Center for 
Digital Business and Center for Collective Intelligence to facilitate collaboration between faculty and researchers.
MIT CISR is funded by Research Patrons and Sponsors and we gratefully acknowledge the support and contributions 
of its current Research Patrons and Sponsors.
CONTACT INFORMATION
Center for Information Systems Research MIT Sloan School of Management
5 Cambridge Center, NE25, 7 Floor Cambridge, MA 02142
Telephone: 617-253-2348
Facsimile: 617-253-4424
Email: cisr@mit.edu http://mitsloan.mit.edu/cisr
MITSloan
MANAGEMENT
Mission and Contact Information as of August 1, 2009.
CISR RESEARCH PATRONS
BT Group
DiamondCluster International, Inc. Gartner
Hewlett-Packard Company
IBM Corporation
Microsoft Corporation
CISR SPONSORS
Aetna Inc.
Allmerica Financial
Allstate Insurance Co.
AstraZeneca Pharmaceuticals, LP
Banknorth, NA

--- PAGE 33 ---
Biogen, Inc.
Campbell Soup Company
Celanese
Chevron Texaco Corp.
Det Norske Veritas
eFunds Corp.
EMC?
The Gillette Company
The Guardian Life Insurance Co. of America
Intel Corporation
International Finance Corp.
Merrill Lynch & Company
MetLife
Mohegan Sun
Motorola, Inc.
National Kidney Foundation (Singapore)
Nomura Research Institute, Ltd. (Japan)
Pfizer Inc.
PFPC, Inc.
Qwest Communications
Raytheon Company
State Street Corporation
TRW, Inc.