--- PAGE 1 ---
EUR Research Information Portal
Scaling Agile Company-Wide
Published in:
IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management
Publication status and date:
Published: 15/12/2021
DOI (link to publisher):
10.1109/TEM.2021.3128278
Document Version
Publisher's PDF, also known as Version of record
Document License/Available under:
Article 25fa Dutch Copyright Act
Citation for the published version (APA):
van Wessel, R. M., Kroon, P., & de Vries, H. J. (2021). Scaling Agile Company-Wide: The Organizational Challenge of
Combining Agile-Scaling Frameworks and Enterprise Architecture in Service Companies. IEEE Transactions on Engineering
Management. https://doi.org/10.1109/TEM.2021.3128278
Link to publication on the EUR Research Information Portal
Terms and Conditions of Use
Except as permitted by the applicable copyright law, you may not reproduce or make this material available to any third party
without the prior written permission from the copyright holder(s). Copyright law allows the following uses of this material
without prior permission:
• you may download, save and print a copy of this material for your personal use only;
• you may share the EUR portal link to this material.
In case the material is published with an open access license (e.g. a Creative Commons (CC) license), other uses may be
allowed. Please check the terms and conditions of the specific license.
Take-down policy
If you believe that this material infringes your copyright and/or any other intellectual property rights, you may request its
removal by contacting us at the following email address: openaccess.library@eur.nl. Please provide us with all the relevant
information, including the reasons why you believe any of your rights have been infringed. In case of a legitimate complaint,
we will make the material inaccessible and/or remove it from the website.

--- PAGE 2 ---
Thisarticlehasbeenacceptedforinclusioninafutureissueofthisjournal.Contentisfinalaspresented,withtheexceptionofpagination.
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ENGINEERING MANAGEMENT 1
Scaling Agile Company-Wide: The Organizational
Challenge of Combining Agile-Scaling Frameworks
and Enterprise Architecture in Service Companies
Robert M. van Wessel , Philip Kroon, and Henk J. de Vries
Abstract—Many organizations have embraced agile methods.
Studiesshowatrendoflarge-scaleapplicationofagileframeworks
company-wide. Emergent architecture design as part of an agile
approach is effective at the project level but causes issues when
services need to interact seamlessly at the enterprise level. Enter-
prise architecture (EA) can provide such coherence. Combining
the scaling agile methods with EA is challenging. However, such a
combinationcouldbenefitfromtheflexibilitythatagileapproaches
offer and provide the consistency and long-term focus that EA
pursues. This article uses the longitudinal case study research to
explore how organizations can effectively govern Agile and EA
in large-scale agile transformations. Our case analysis shows that
methods for scaling Agile do not provide sufficient guidance to
properly handle the transformation from existing EA practices to
an Agile EA combination company-wide. We propose how EA can
be applied effectively in large-scale agile transformations despite
the two seemingly conflicting approaches of Agile and EA. Based
on our findings, we propose a conceptual model for future research
that incorporates factors that take EA into account in the gover-
nance of agile-scaling frameworks. Our findings extend current
literature on coordination mechanisms between architects and
agile teams in large-scale agile transformations, thereby balancing
emergent and intentional architectures.
Index Terms—Agile methods, agile-scaling frameworks (ASFs),
collaborations in technology management, enterprise architecture
(EA), new service development, organizational change, project
management, software process management.
I. INTRODUCTION
GLOBALIZATION and digitization have impacted inter-
national service sectors [1]. Customer expectations have
Manuscript received April 30, 2021; revised September 24, 2021; accepted
October27,2021.ReviewofthismanuscriptwasarrangedbyDepartmentEditor
G. Marzi. (Corresponding author: Robert M. van Wessel.)
Robert M. van Wessel is with the Department of Technology and
Operations Management, Rotterdam School of Management, Erasmus Univer-
sity (RSM), 3062, PA Rotterdam, The Netherlands (e-mail: rwessel@rsm.nl;
apexis@ymail.com).
Philip Kroon is with a major international consulting firm, 1057 JD, Amster-
dam, The Netherlands (e-mail: philip.t.kroon@gmail.com).
Henk J. de Vries is with the Department of Technology and Operations
Management, Rotterdam School of Management, Erasmus University (RSM),
3062, PA Rotterdam, The Netherlands, and also with the Department of Values,
Technology and Innovation, Faculty of Technology, Policy and Management,
Delft University of Technology, 2628, CD Delft, The Netherlands (e-mail:
hvries@rsm.nl; h.j.devries-2@tudelft.nl).
Color versions of one or more figures in this article are available at
https://doi.org/10.1109/TEM.2021.3128278.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TEM.2021.3128278
grown, technology has advanced, and new regulatory require-
mentshaveemerged[2].Thechallengeforserviceorganizations
is to keep up with these developments and meet the require-
ments related to user experience, performance, privacy, and
interoperability [3]. This requires seamless interaction within
and between complex service systems [4] while anticipating
changes [5].
To increase the speed and flexibility of the services offered to
customers, many organizations have embraced agile methods.
This started with small projects of interactively and iteratively
building and testing software. Nowadays, agile methods are
being applied in large projects, multiteam settings, and large
organizations[6]–[8].Thisarticlefocusesonthelatter.However,
the more agile the projects are, the higher the risk that the
coherence of the portfolio of services and the processes and
IT systems facilitating these is at stake [9]. Traditionally, this
is the field of enterprise architecture (EA) that aims to develop
IT-enabled systems in a coherent way, while standards allow for
interoperability between these systems [10]–[12]. Agile meth-
ods have been criticized for lack of attention to architecture
[13], [14]. Ross et al. [10] related EA to business processes
and IT infrastructures that deal with organizations’ integration
andstandardizationrequirements.EAprovidesalong-termview
of a company’s processes, systems, and technologies so that
individualprojectscanbuildcapabilities.Italsodealswithinter-
relationshipsoutsidetheimmediateenterprise,therebyfocusing
on interoperability requisites.
Agile approaches include emergent architecture design. They
are effective at the project level but cause issues when services
need to interact seamlessly at the enterprise level [15]. A tradi-
tional architectural approach resembles a waterfall approach, as
both
1) use sequential processes,
2) distinguish distinct roles in subsequent development
phases,
3) prescribe detailed front-end plans and rely on documen-
tation,
4) deal with clear guidelines and milestones throughout de-
velopment projects [16], [9].
Combining Agile with EA is more challenging because of
scaling and complexity factors [17]. Coherence problems at
the enterprise level may cause tensions in terms of gover-
nance and management. Applying agile methods entails that the
0018-9391 © 2021 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Erasmus Universiteit Rotterdam. Downloaded on January 10,2022 at 09:57:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

--- PAGE 3 ---
Thisarticlehasbeenacceptedforinclusioninafutureissueofthisjournal.Contentisfinalaspresented,withtheexceptionofpagination.
2 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ENGINEERING MANAGEMENT
architecture should evolve incrementally rather than being im-
posedbyenterprisearchitects.Variousagile-scalingframeworks
(ASFs), such as scaled agile framework (SAFe), DA2.0, and
large-scale scrum (LeSS), are available to scale agile practices
to large projects and enterprises [18]. However, each has lim-
itations regarding the attention paid to EA [15]. Some studies
address how to apply Agile in the context of changing require-
ments but a stable architecture, cf., [19]–[21]. However, how
to organize the codevelopment of both paradigms has not been
addressed sufficiently [22].
This article uses longitudinal case study research to explore
the effects of large-scale agile transformations on the orga-
nization of EA. More specifically, it examines the impact of
implementing ASFs enterprise-wide on the role and processes
of EA in the large service organizations. It raises questions on
howtodealwiththesetwoconflictingparadigms.Isitpossibleto
combinethestrengthsofbothAgileandEA?Whataretheeffects
when both the architectural and agile paradigms are used at
scaleinanorganization?Suchacombinationcouldbenefitfrom
the flexibility that agile approaches offer, and at the same time,
provide the consistency and long-term focus that EA pursues.
Therefore, we intend to better understand how organizations
can effectively adopt both Agile and EA in large-scale agile
transformations.
Therestofthisarticleisorganizedasfollows.Thenextsection
providesaliteratureoverviewofAgileandEAperspectives.Sec-
tion III describes our research method, and Section IV presents
the results of the longitudinal case study. Section V discusses
ourfindingsandoutlinesthelimitations,andSectionVIprovides
our conclusions and gives implications for future research and
practice.
II. LITERATURE
Organizations that develop and offer IT-supported services
face the challenge of creating a coherent set of services and
systemsthatmeetfast-changingneeds.Thisrequiresbotharchi-
tecture and flexible development. Practitioners have developed
various frameworks to address this challenge. However, there
is an inherent tension between the frameworks related to EA,
such as the open group architecture framework (TOGAF) and
department of defense architecture framework (DoDAF) [23],
and those which facilitate enterprises to become Agile, such as
SAFe and Disciplined Agile [22].
Traditionally,organizationsthatdevelopedITsystemstosup-
port services used waterfall-like approaches [24], [25]. These
provided clear guidelines and milestones for the development
trajectory. However, if the entire development cycle is planned,
emergent properties and requirements revealed during the de-
velopment process cannot easily be incorporated. The waterfall
method “doesn’t reflect [the] iterative nature of exploratory
development.” [26, p. 96] Recognizing the potential benefits of
iterativesoftwaredevelopmentoverthelinearityofthewaterfall
model, developers started using other, more iterative models
[27]. Iterative constructs in business date back as far as 1957
and the earliest reference to iterative development can be traced
back to 1968. Yet, they only started their rise to popularity in
thelate1990s[28].Acknowledgingthebenefitsofiterativeover
linear approaches laid the foundation for what is understood as
“Agile” today. However, the introduction of Agile as a widely
embracedconceptdidnotsurfaceuntilthenewmillennium[27].
Agile methods are most suitable in projects that are subject to
frequently changing or unpredictable requirements and incor-
porate IT applications that are innovated repeatedly, resulting
in high degrees of uncertainty and project risks [29], [30].
These methods also help innovators dealing with instability and
uncertaintyintechnologicalandmarketenvironments[31],[32].
They are not suitable in all projects [33], and their potential
“impact on the people, the process, and the project must all
be considered.” [34, p. 8] Traditional stage-gate methods are
used in larger projects with stable and predictable requirements
[29], [35]. Hybrid models, which combine traditional and agile
development approaches [36], [37], have been proposed as well
[38]–[40]. However, the coexistence of two different ways of
working causes challenges [41], especially from an organiza-
tional point of view [42].
In many cases, agile software development outperforms the
waterfall method [43], [44] in terms of time, budget, and user
satisfaction. The advantages of using agile teams include in-
creased transparency and project control, mutual learning and
understanding within agile teams, and easy and quick priori-
tization of requirements. However, agile methods do not scale
well. There is a little focus on architecture in agile development
which may lead to bad design decisions, and integration testing
of the individual team deliverables is difficult [9]. On average,
the development performance and product quality using Agile
are better [45]. However, for globally distributed development
teams, no significant differences were found between the agile
projects and traditional software development [46], with no
conclusive evidence, yet, about the superiority of Agile over
Waterfall [47].
Since 2000, based on the Agile Manifesto [27], many agile
methodshavebeenintroduced,includingareasbeyondsoftware
development, such as project management, manufacturing, and
management in general [13], [48]. Scrum is the most popular
method [49], [50] and has become the de-facto standard for
managingknowledgework,especiallysoftwaredevelopment. It
is designed for small teams (from three to nine members) who
breakuptheirworkintoso-called“sprints”:timeboxediterations
typicallylastingtwoweeks[51].Thesteadyflowofagile-driven
endeavorsinspiredvariouspractitionerstoexperimentandinno-
vate with the agile methodology, leading to the new challenge
of large-scale agile applications. These applications occur in
large multiteam settings, such as “50 persons or more, or at
least six teams.” [41, p. 88] Scaling agile methods [41] refers to
applyingagiletechniquesinlargerprojectsorlargercompanies.
ASFs scale agile practices to large projects and enterprises [18].
Large-scale agile transformation is the “switch from existing
workorganizationconceptsordevelopmentapproachestoagile
methods … [that]… can cover a one-time big bang transfer to
agile methods in a large setting or a stepwise approach where
anagilepilotissubsequentlyscaledupintoalargesetting.”[52,
p.3]Itinvolvescriticalmanagerialchallengesandconsequences
for the entire organization [52]. Because of the diversity of
organizations, there is no standard roadmap on how to master
agile transformations. These authors categorize the challenges
Authorized licensed use limited to: Erasmus Universiteit Rotterdam. Downloaded on January 10,2022 at 09:57:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

--- PAGE 4 ---
Thisarticlehasbeenacceptedforinclusioninafutureissueofthisjournal.Contentisfinalaspresented,withtheexceptionofpagination.
VAN WESSEL et al.: SCALING AGILE COMPANY-WIDE: ORGANIZATIONAL CHALLENGE OF COMBINING ASFs AND EA IN SERVICE COMPANIES 3
TABLE I
KEY CHARACTERISTICS OF SAFE, LESS, AND SPOTIFY FRAMEWORKS1
for large-scale agile transformations. Given the focus of our
study (the governance of the combination of EA and Agile), we
address method-, organization-, and culture-related challenges,
such as poor customization of agile methods, inappropriate
organizational structures, and incompatible social structures.
Adopting ASFs brings several benefits and challenges [13],
[33],[41],[43].Benefitsincludeeasierprioritizationofbusiness
requirements, better management of dependencies, enabling
frequent deliveries, and enhancing employee satisfaction, mo-
tivation, and engagement. Common challenges are cross-team
coordination, the resistance to change and remaining power
structures,lackofmanagementbuy-in,andmaintaininganagile
mindset. ASFs are a starting point for an agile transformation.
However, they cannot be applied as cooking recipes as those
offer insufficient guidance on challenges when dealing with
scaling and complexity factors. More research is needed on
the benefits and challenges and understanding which practices
contribute to success [33].
Three frequently applied ASFs are the SAFe, LeSS, and the
Spotify model [6], [50] (see Table I). These agile frameworks
havetheirownsetofprinciples,inspiredbytheAgileManifesto.
Only SAFe provides EA coordination mechanisms [15], and
these require tailoring to an organization’s specific needs [53].
The benefits of SAFe include improved collaboration and de-
pendencymanagementbetweenagileteamsandincreasedtrans-
parencyintheorganization.Itsmainchallengesareteamforma-
tion, change resistance, organizational politics, and establishing
an agile mindset [18].
Largeservicecompanies,particularlymultinationals,needan
architectureapproachtothedigitalsupportoftheirservices.This
is because technologies, businesses, economies, politics, and
societies are fundamentally transforming and consequently rad-
icallyimpacttheiroperations,requiringcomplexandflexibleIT-
enabled systems [1], [4], [55]. Following the Zachman’s frame-
work for information systems architecture [56], [12], various
EA frameworks have emerged over the past decades [57]. Con-
sequently, many definitions exist. ISO/IEC/IEEE 42010:2011
(p. 2) defines architecture as: “fundamental concepts or proper-
ties of a system in its environment embodied in its elements,
relationships, and in the principles of its design and evolu-
tion.” Ross et al. [10, p. 47] define EA as “the organizing
1Sources used include: [Online]. Available: https://www.
scaledagileframework.com/about/; https://less.works/less/framework; https://
blog.crisp.se/2012/11/14
logic for business processes and IT infrastructure, reflecting the
integration and standardization requirements of the company’s
operating model.” Murer and Bonati [58] positioned EA as a
tool to manage complexity resulting from evolving information
systems in enterprises to meet business goals, such as boosting
productivity, increasing market share, or excelling in customer
service. The main objective of EA is to guide coherent design
and implementation by providing holistic overviews and norms
through governing technology decisions and direction settings
bybusinessandITstakeholders[10],[11],[59].Oneofthemost
popular EA frameworks globally is TOGAF [49], [60], [61].
Aside from its iterative element, the architecture development
method, TOGAF shares many waterfall-related attributes.
EAisatop–downapproach.Executivesdecideonthestrategy
and communicate this down the ranks of the company [60].
In contrast, Agile is a bottom–up approach. Small teams of
employeesworkflexiblyandrespondrapidlytoemergentissues
and properties. This apparent contradiction does not mean that
these concepts cannot strengthen each other [60], [62]. EA can
be an empowering tool for increased agility on its own [10],
[63]. Enterprise architects play an essential role in developing
digital services. They determine which components are likely
to be used and should be designed for reuse and stored in a
repository [10], [64]. The traditional centralized role of EA of
tracking changes, approving projects, and enforcing standards
[10] shifts toward a decentralized decision-making process of
advising agile teams in their architectural decisions [65]–[67],
with enterprise architects willing to work toward a feasible and
timelysolutionandacceptingarchitecturalimperfectionsforthe
sake of business value [68]. Many companies have decided to
incorporate various agile principles into their EA, but there is
disagreementonwhichaspectsareimportant.Moreover,around
38% of the organizations struggle with outdated EA results
that are not fit for the combination with agile practices [60].
Therefore, enterprise architects should get involved in agile
projects. However, it remains to be seen if and how enterprise
architects can adapt to a new way of working [7]. While the
agile development methods are commonplace in many large
organizations, insight into the relations and interactions with
architecturemethodsattheenterpriselevelremainselusive[14].
PriorresearchhasattemptedtolinktraditionalEAwiththeAgile
Manifesto [60] or integrate TOGAF and Scrum [66]. However,
the effect of ASFs on EA is not well understood [60], and
the academic literature that explores the role of EA in agile
contexts is still very scarce [65], [69]. The gap in the academic
Authorized licensed use limited to: Erasmus Universiteit Rotterdam. Downloaded on January 10,2022 at 09:57:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

--- PAGE 5 ---
Thisarticlehasbeenacceptedforinclusioninafutureissueofthisjournal.Contentisfinalaspresented,withtheexceptionofpagination.
4 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ENGINEERING MANAGEMENT
literature relates specifically to the lack of empirical studies that
cover scaling agile methods combined with architectures, their
implications, and their application in non-IT organizations.
Agile principle 11 of the Agile Manifesto [27, p. 3], “The
best architectures, requirements, and designs emerge from self-
organizing teams” suggests that Agile excludes EA frameworks
because of its predefined structure. This is problematic for
the growing number of major companies worldwide in their
large-scale agile development efforts. The challenge of large-
scaleagiletransformationsisbalancingemergentandintentional
architecture and communicating and coordinating development
activities across teams [15]. This inherent tension may cause
organizational inertia because of inconsistent, redundant, or
conflicting solutions and technical debt [70]. Agile approaches
tend to neglect architectural design for information systems
[9], [20]. Applying Scrum to EA management [71] or using
“building blocks” based on Lean and agile principles to make
the EA management more Agile could be an option. This would
streamline architecture processes and foster collaboration and
participation[19].Othersuggestionsincludeprinciple-basedin-
tentional architecting [65] and integrating architectural thinking
using design principles for architecture content and organiza-
tional setup [70]. The role of architecture in large-scale agile
transformationsisoftenoverlooked,andagileteamsoftenstrug-
gle due to the lack of suitable architectures [68]. These authors
found that in agile environments, the focus of the architecture
function shifts from architecture compliance checking toward
a supporting expert role, focusing on the quality aspects of
services, and aiming to reduce technical debt.
A structured literature review identified 20 ASFs, including
LeSS, SAFe, and Spotify. Only three frameworks (SAFe, DA
2.0, and EADAGP) include the role of enterprise architects
[15]. Findings suggest that enterprise architects develop the
organization’s roadmap in ASFs, assist business stakeholders,
and agile teams with governance issues, guide them through
the business and technical roadmaps, and help them identify
potentially reusable assets and technical debts. Such an Agile
EA governance approach, which includes EA in the agile gov-
ernance of an organization, can support the large-scale agile
development activities [65], [68]. Enterprise architects can fa-
cilitate interteam architecture exchange by exerting normative
andmimeticpressurestomeetintentionalarchitecture[72].The
main challenge in coordination between teams in large-scale
agile transformations is their autonomy. However, they depend
oneachothertoaligntheireffortsonarchitecture,requirements,
integration, testing, and deliverables [73]. Next, to maintain
an overview in the large-scale setting and managing priorities,
they need to deal with the architecture and technical depen-
dencies. Communities of practice and approaches in multiteam
programs that blend agile and traditional practices can support
the development teams [73]. A case study describes a mixture
of agile and traditional meetings to exchange knowledge and
establish relationships early in a program. Later on, a gradual
transition to unscheduled meetings took place [74]. Our study
extends this article with the combination of Agile and EA in
large-scale agile transformations. A systematic mapping study
disclosedasignificantbodyofknowledgeofASFsinthefieldof
large-scale agile development [22]. Based on 133 publications,
the study identified open research questions for ten research
streams, such as communication and coordination, architecture,
andautonomousteams.Theyalsoformulatedresearchquestions
regarding the combination of large-scale agile transformation
and EA. These questions relate to
1) the role of enterprise architects, their collaboration with
agile teams, and typical challenges;
2) coordination mechanisms at the intra and interteam level;
3) balancing decision-making power between architects and
agile teams;
4) balancing emergent and intentional architectures; and
5) managing technical debts and driving large-scale agile
transformations.
To conclude, the literature reveals effective management
practices, including criteria on organizational readiness, the
degree and type of scaling required, and the organizational
changes needed to implement an agile scaling framework in
large-scale transformations [6], [10], [41]. However, governing
such approaches in combination with EA methods causes new
challenges. Researchers disagree on which aspects of EA are
important in an agile context [60], how enterprise architects can
adapt to an agile way of working [7], the relationships between
agile and EA methods [14], and how these can strengthen each
other [60], [62]. In addition, issues remain regarding balancing
emergent and intentional architecture, ensuring vertical coor-
dination between top–down governance of architecture efforts,
andbottom–upautonomyofagileteamsandaligninghorizontal
coordination between multiple agile teams [73], [75]. Other
issues include managing (product and) service development
activities in various settings (projects and in the entire orga-
nization) and defining the role of the enterprise architect in
such venues [7], [15], [41], [65]. Therefore, as the current body
of knowledge lacks these detailed insights, we formulate the
followingresearchquestion:“Whatkindofgovernanceisneeded
in organizations to combine EA and large-scale application of
agilemethods?”Toanswerthisquestion,wealsoinvestigatethe
importantEAcharacteristicsinanagilecontext.Wedistilledfive
constructs [76] from the literature described previously that are
not explicitly defined as such (see Table II). These serve as the
basis for our empirical research to further explore the impact of
the application of large-scale agile transformations on the role
and processes of EA in organizations.
III. METHODOLOGY
Weconductedalongitudinalmultiple-casestudytogainmore
insight into the constructs and how they influence each other.
This method is appropriate as there is little previous research on
thistopic,anditprovidesanin-depthoverviewofreal-lifesitua-
tionsandcontemporaryphenomena[79].Wecollecteddatafrom
three European service companies that carried out large-scale
agile transformations. We selected large companies, with over
500 full-timeequivalents (FTEs),because we expect the need to
combine an agile approach with EA to be more compelling and
challenging in large than in small and medium-sized enterprises
(SMEs). Criteria for case selection were as follows:
1) various large companies within the service sector;
2) IT support is essential for service delivery;
Authorized licensed use limited to: Erasmus Universiteit Rotterdam. Downloaded on January 10,2022 at 09:57:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

--- PAGE 6 ---
Thisarticlehasbeenacceptedforinclusioninafutureissueofthisjournal.Contentisfinalaspresented,withtheexceptionofpagination.
VAN WESSEL et al.: SCALING AGILE COMPANY-WIDE: ORGANIZATIONAL CHALLENGE OF COMBINING ASFs AND EA IN SERVICE COMPANIES 5
TABLE II
CONSTRUCTS THAT EMERGED FROM THE LITERATURE
3) the organization has transformed to a large-scale agile
development or is at least well on the way; and
4) accessibilityofintervieweesforanextendedperiodoftime
for longitudinal research purposes.
Thisresultedinthreecasecompanies,twoofwhichareactive
in financial services and one in telecommunications. The three
organizations apply different scaling agile methods. Interviews
took place in April and May 2018 and from December 2020 to
February 2021, so this covers a timespan of almost three years.
In 2018, we interviewed nine contractors employed by an
international consultancy firm. The interviewees had performed
various roles during large-scale agile transformations at their
respectiveclients.Allofthemhadfirst-handEA-relatedworking
experience at organizations that adopted a large-scale agile
approach. Their experience in many client companies allowed
them to reflect on their observations better than a case company
employee would be able to do. Their affiliation suggests that
they had common ways of working, so differences between
cases were primarily due to company characteristics and how
the ASF was implemented. And in terms of the contents of their
advice, these consultants provided tailor-made advice without
any predefined preferences.
Our case study protocol included general rules, procedures,
and a questionnaire. The questionnaire included open questions
about
1) company-specific features of the agile framework,
2) scope of the implementation,
3) experienceswiththeagileimplementation,includinghow
the agile transformation changed EA-related roles and
processes,
4) stage-gate elements that were retained,
5) typeofagilegovernance:Whatkindofdecisionsaremade
by whom and how are these decisions monitored.
At the start of each interview, we ensured that all interviewed
parties shared the same understanding of the specific principles
of ASFs. Each semistructured interview took approximately
80 min, was audio recorded, and subsequently transcribed. We
informed all interviewees of the purpose of the recordings and
the anonymization of the resulting transcript. Transcripts were
madeimmediatelyandsenttotherespondentsforvalidationand
approval. In addition, we used documents from the companies
and information from the third-party websites that discussed
these transformations.
For the within-case analysis of the first interview round,
we imported the transcribed text files into the qualitative data
analysis software ATLAS.TI. We coded the results using an
integrated approach that employs both a deductive and induc-
tive (ground-up) development of codes [80]. It was deductive
because the literature revealed core concepts we could use in
preparing the questions. These also served as a basis for some
of the codes that were characteristic of the answers given. It
was inductive as the second category of codes emerged from the
interviews and company-specific documents and publications
and were not foreseen in advance. Such findings sometimes
lead to additional questions in the free-format part of later
semistructured interviews. We ended up with 49 codes per
ASF, which we distributed over the constructs underlying our
questionnaire. In the cross-case analysis, we examined the simi-
laritiesanddifferencesamongthethreecases.Toincreasetheva-
lidityandreliability[79],[81],wetriangulatedtheinterviewdata
Authorized licensed use limited to: Erasmus Universiteit Rotterdam. Downloaded on January 10,2022 at 09:57:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

--- PAGE 7 ---
Thisarticlehasbeenacceptedforinclusioninafutureissueofthisjournal.Contentisfinalaspresented,withtheexceptionofpagination.
6 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ENGINEERING MANAGEMENT
TABLE III
COMPANY PROFILES
TABLE IV
HIGHLIGHTS OF THE LARGE-SCALE AGILE TRANSFORMATION PER CASE COMPANY
withpubliclyavailableinformationfromthird-partywebsiteson
the transformations of the case companies. For this cross-case
analysis, we imported our findings in an ATLAS.TI project
file, followed by an analysis similar to the within-case analy-
sis. Subsequently, we identified, documented, and presented all
similarities and differences to the interviewees.
FromDecember2020toFebruary2021,weinterviewedseven
contractors from the same consultancy firm, five of whom had
also been interviewed in 2018. One of the new interviewees
recently joined the consultancy firm after working at one of the
case organizations for over 18 years. He was, therefore, able to
provide detailed insider information. The interviews were held
online and lasted approximately 60 min. We applied the same
case study protocol as before but revised the questionnaire to
increase the focus on the governance aspects of the ASF and
EA combination [82]. We used the publicly available company
project reports, presentations, and leaflets and shared company
findings with the interviewees to allow for corrections and
additions. Within-case differences in perception, if any, were
discussed with the interviewees.
IV. RESULTS
A. Case Studies
We present the large-scale agile transformation and examine
the impact of EA and its underlying processes. Table III gives
an overview of the case companies, with the ASF in use at both
timeframesofourlongitudinalstudy.Forthesakeofanonymity,
the three organizations of this case study are designated with
letters A, B, and C. Initially, Company A adopted SAFe, B
adopted LeSS, and C adopted the Spotify model (Period 1:
transformationphase).Tooursurprise,alleventuallytransposed
into a hybrid ASF solution (Period 2: application phase) as they
combinedtheelementsfromSAFeandSpotify.Forallthreecase
organizations, the range of the ASF concerned all services pro-
vided. The reach was the entire enterprise, except for Company
C, which was limited to its retail and wholesale departments.
Table IV provides an overview of the transformation character-
istics and results in the two timeframes of the longitudinal case
study: the implementation phase and operational phase. Next,
we describe the cases, followed by the cross-case analysis.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Erasmus Universiteit Rotterdam. Downloaded on January 10,2022 at 09:57:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

--- PAGE 8 ---
Thisarticlehasbeenacceptedforinclusioninafutureissueofthisjournal.Contentisfinalaspresented,withtheexceptionofpagination.
VAN WESSEL et al.: SCALING AGILE COMPANY-WIDE: ORGANIZATIONAL CHALLENGE OF COMBINING ASFs AND EA IN SERVICE COMPANIES 7
1) Company A: Company A is a large telecom operator,
providing digital cable television, Internet, and telephone ser-
vices to residential and commercial customers. It is a result
of several mergers in the last decade. The main objective of
the large-scale agile transformation was to remain competitive.
The decision to build an agile organization was taken before
the actual implementation of SAFe. Before the last merger,
the two companies had chosen distinct ASFs. At the start of
agile transformation, top management support was lacking.
During the merger, the IT department pursued SAFe, whereas
theBusinessdivisiondidnotwanttopartwiththeSpotifymodel
because of its appealing simplicity. The company finally chose
SAFe as the leading ASF since it defined the role of archi-
tecture and provided employees with clarity through extensive
documentation.
Transformation phase: The ASF scope (reach and range)
covered the whole enterprise and all business and supporting
activities: B2C, B2B, Finance, HR, etc. When asked what
architecture-related elements were crucial for the successful
implementation of SAFe, the interviewees mentioned that the
caseorganizationpositionedenterprisearchitectsinhigherranks
of the organization to oversee all chains involved. The De-
sign Authority Lead responsible for the agile transformation
commented on the EA before the transformation: “old school
[traditional] EA does not provide in-depth advice, which makes
itredundant.”Conversely,asolutionarchitectwhofocusesonits
solution only is ineffective as well. Therefore, enterprise archi-
tectswerepositionedsomewherebetweentheseextremes.Third,
organization A should be capable of change. Therefore, strong
leadership and a dedicated workforce were required to quickly
master new processes and tools for company A to successfully
transform to SAFe. The Program Director reinforced this: “if
architects are unwilling to change and adapt to a new way of
working, then you [organization A] cannot succeed.”
Traditional EA-related processes were identified, and a SAFe
flavor was added during the implementation project. Staff was
trained in SAFe/Agile to work in this new way. Key roles and
concepts from TOGAF remained unchanged under the SAFe
implementation. The Design Authority Lead appointed several
architects to SAFe’s highest level to help operate and steer the
organization. At that level, priorities were set during quarterly
business review (QBR) sessions, which turned out to be an
effective governance mechanism. A QBR resembles increment
planning in some agile frameworks, which reflects on the past
quarter’s results and takes the lessons learned to guide the plan-
ning for the quarter to come. The Program Director pointed out
anotherimportantchange:Thebusinessdepartmentsweregiven
more influence in shaping the architecture roadmap, so in that
sense, the actual “architecture did not change, but the processes
related to practicing architecture changed significantly.”
1) Application phase: Recently, the company created a new
department, the Design Authority, to direct programs and
projects.TherelationshipbetweenagileworkingandEAismost
evident at program increment events where (solution and enter-
prise) architects are involved in discussions with tribe leads and
squad members. Architecture guidance for the organization’s
newservicesatthesenior/boardlevelisrequiredaswellasmore
lead architects per tribe, who work hands-on with the teams
(squads) to ensure that the roadmap is clear and impediments
are removed. The organization expects architects to support the
tribes. This is different from what they used to do. There was
a misalignment between what an architect delivered (high-level
plansanddesigndocumentsreviews)andwhatthedevelopment
teams needed. Therefore, the organization established two ar-
chitecture roles: a) enterprise architects who report to the CIO
and a tribe lead, and b) lead architects who are a part of a tribe,
perform hands-on work, and monitor implementations.
The organizational structure follows the Spotify model team
setup (with tribes and squads) that operates autonomously as
much as possible. They use concepts and roles from SAFe
to deliver large complex changes. However, many service
matters concern cross-tribe issues. Consequently, safeguarding
the integration and monitoring the solution is a challenge.
Therefore, additional management layers and roles have been
added to the ASF. As a result, the organization is not as Agile
as it is supposed to be.
Overall, their agile approach enables the organization to pri-
oritize changes and, thus, achieve greater flexibility. However,
the organization has issues with integrating legacy systems into
theiragile wayof working. Significant improvements have been
made to digital channels for sales and support, resulting in
increased customer satisfaction. However, the Design Authority
Lead argued that these benefits could also have been achieved
with other ASF hybrids.
2) Company B: Company B is a multinational financial ser-
vicescompany.Itwishedtoalignallitsdepartmentsandincrease
servicedelivery agility.Initially,theyadoptedLeSS.Theirmain
reason for choosing LeSS was that their competitors had imple-
mented other ASFs, so LeSS would differentiate them from the
competition.
Transformation phase: In the first period of our investigation,
Company B used LeSS for guidance rather than enforcing strict
implementation. Company departments experimented semiau-
tonomously with working large-scale agile. During the imple-
mentation, the traditional business architects were replaced by
theProductOwners.ThisshiftwasinlinewithLeSS:enterprise
architects’ traditional and relatively passive role was no longer
acceptable. They had to become more proactive and join forces
with people who worked closer to the respective domains. The
Assignment Manager was not convinced: “LeSS may not help
[companyB]toproperlymaintainthearchitectureatthecorrect
level because it will seriously compromise the added value of
enterprise architecture.” He continued: “… and the inherent
simplification of EA roles due to the LeSS framework could and
should be tackled.”
When scaling agile company-wide, an increasing number of
departments implemented agile projects. However, these imple-
mentations did not fit together well. Therefore, the organization
decidedtoprovidemoretop–downguidanceandaddedelements
from Spotify and SAFe.
Application phase: Currently, the reach and range of the agile
approach cover the entire enterprise, and business-supporting
activities. The key governance roles in their ASF are a Prod-
uct Owner (business representative), an IT delivery manager
Authorized licensed use limited to: Erasmus Universiteit Rotterdam. Downloaded on January 10,2022 at 09:57:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

--- PAGE 9 ---
Thisarticlehasbeenacceptedforinclusioninafutureissueofthisjournal.Contentisfinalaspresented,withtheexceptionofpagination.
8 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ENGINEERING MANAGEMENT
(short-term view), and an enterprise architect (long-term view).
Theyareresponsiblefortheworkcarriedoutinthesquads.This
trilateral cooperation already existed before the organization
started with the agile transformation, and it continued to work
reasonably well and led to smooth decision-making. The archi-
tecturefunctionoftheorganizationoperatessomewhatdetached
from the squads. It is responsible for checking whether the
proposed solutions met the predefined architecture principles.
The strategy consultant suggested that “architects could take a
more active role in IT delivery, because of the long-term vision
they are committed to.”
The organization has applied company-wide agile methods
for almost three years now, but is struggling with the small
independentself-steeringteams.Eachtribeandsquadpursuesits
own goals, and nobody seems to feel end-to-end responsibility.
Squads are capped to around ten team members. A lot of time is
spent on coordinating the squads. Management provides little
guidance, as they assume agile teams to be self-managing.
However,thenewlydesignatedmanagementrolesprovidemore
direction to squads and tribes. Management support for the
large-scale application of agile methods is an issue because
managers often stick to existing structures.
The QBRs have improved communication between tribes,
and dependencies are better managed now. Architects play an
important role in quickly identifying the dependencies between
tribesandindicatingwhatshouldbediscussedintheQBRs.The
Strategy Consultant commented: “This governance mechanism
allows us to make clear choices. The QBR should be used as
a checkpoint for the direction the organization is heading to.
There’s not much left of our waterfall method, except for these
QBRs that are actually also waterfall and can be used to set
priorities efficiently.”
The application of their hybrid ASF has resulted in a slightly
faster delivery of new services because the squads work closely
together.However,accordingtotheProgramManager,thedeliv-
ery is “not very high and [it] should be monitored better. There
is little top-down Quality Assurance.” The results include big
differences between squads and no key performance indicator
(KPIs) for the delivery speed. In the design phase, modifica-
tions can be made more rapidly. However, time-to-market of
products and services has improved only marginally because
the implementation phase has not been shortened. A positive
effect of working Agile is the greater sense of responsibility
in teams. Staff is more committed, and therefore changes are
implementedfaster.Teammatesalsodaretomakemoremistakes
and learn from such mistakes and from each other. For many
servicemanagers,thelarge-scaleagiletransformationisdifficult
because team members openly express opinions about their
managers’ performance.
3) Company C: Company C is a multinational financial ser-
vices company. Its main objective with the large-scale agile
transformation was to reduce the time-to-market of its services
and reduce IT development and maintenance costs.
1) Transformation phase: Company C implemented and en-
forced Spotify instantaneously across its retail division as part
of a “big bang” reorganization. Agile coaches facilitated the
cultural changes needed. According to the Business Integrator,
the company “let go 50% of its IT staff and added 20% new
employees, resulting in an overall 30% decrease in IT-related
jobs.” The IT development departments, most of the Retail
organization, and some supporting functions (e.g., Legal and
Compliance) were reallocated to agile teams. Later on, the
wholesale division adopted the ASF as well.
Prior to the Spotify implementation, the company had an
EA board with a dominant position in the organization. This
governance layer was removed. The former architecture func-
tion was based on the TOGAF practices. According to the
interviewed IT integrator, “the organization was so focused on
becoming fully agile, that it completely neglected the changing
role of EA.” The EA processes remained the same but were
not included in the agile governance. The role and responsi-
bilities of the architects were not clearly defined, and there
was no structure anymore to align the solutions for services
with an architecture board. There was a chief architect in name
(and on paper), but it remained unclear who was in charge of
what. A global architect was responsible for an architecture
description per business area.
The Spotify model provides very little implementation docu-
mentation.Thecompanymadevariouscustomizationsandaddi-
tionstothemodeltomakeitfitforuse.Teamalignmentwasquite
successful, but cross-tribe alignment was more challenging.
Furthermore,themainobjectivesofprojectsandprogramswere
difficult to coordinate across the organization. Therefore, the
company introduced the Business Integrator role to compensate
for the lack of an overarching governance structure inherent
to the Spotify model. Business Integrators became responsible
for prioritization across tribes and timely delivery. One of them
describeditas“addingsomeclassicprojectmanagement”tothe
framework.Duetothelackofdetailedarchitecturalgovernance,
the Business Integrator had to get things done by himself and
worked with an enterprise architect, a domain architect, and a
solution architect to provide an interim solution to work toward
the target architecture.
2) Application phase: Currently, coordinating work across
teams does not automatically take place in the same agile
manner. Requirements are mutually exchanged, which results
in issues, such as implementing technical interfaces due to the
large dependencies with other agile teams. It is important to
log business requirements swiftly in QBRs, otherwise product
owners are unable to include them in the next round of sprints.
Initially, each tribe had its Agile Coach, and Spotify “chapters”
and “guilds” were active. On the one hand, some events and
ceremonies to align tribes were added to this setup. On the other
hand, the Business Integrator commented: “You should not stick
too rigidly to all prescribed agile ceremonies, because if they do
not add value in a squad or tribe, make it tailor-made.”
Waterfall characteristics partly remained after the Spotify
implementation, especially during the initial phases of new
developments and significant changes. The Business Integrator
further noted: “Cases where the waterfall approach is actually
more useful, are projects that focus on data exchange and in-
terfacing. Agile is very useful for customer-facing applications,
andahybridmodelwithwaterfallaspectsisapplicableforother
subjects.”
Authorized licensed use limited to: Erasmus Universiteit Rotterdam. Downloaded on January 10,2022 at 09:57:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

--- PAGE 10 ---
Thisarticlehasbeenacceptedforinclusioninafutureissueofthisjournal.Contentisfinalaspresented,withtheexceptionofpagination.
VAN WESSEL et al.: SCALING AGILE COMPANY-WIDE: ORGANIZATIONAL CHALLENGE OF COMBINING ASFs AND EA IN SERVICE COMPANIES 9
The large-scale agile transformation has resulted in shorter
communication lines, better coordination between business and
IT departments, faster decisions to get services into production,
and increased staff satisfaction. In addition, it allows certain
business features to be prioritized in IT-supported services.
However, one very important factor has been neglected: An
agile mindset requires a culture change. Initially, agile coaches
were in charge of this culture change, but they were removed
from the tribes to save costs. There is a serious risk that the
benefits of working Agile in company C will eventually be
nullified.
B. Cross Case Analysis
Each case company implemented an ASF to improve soft-
ware development for its services. At the same time, they also
needed EA toensure consistency in theservice portfolioand the
supportingprocessesandsystems.Thecasesconfirmthetension
betweenAgileandEA,andwedescribehowthecompaniesdealt
with this tension. We structure the cross-case analysis using the
five constructs distilled from the literature.
1) ASF characteristics: All three companies adopted a dis-
tinct ASF. Common drivers for implementation included:
1) reduced time-to-market,
2) more flexibility in meeting customer demands,
3) reduced development costs,
4) competitive position (competitors implement agile meth-
ods as well).
In the operational phase, they faced several difficulties. Sub-
sequently, each company took elements from other ASFs and
added management roles for interteam coordination to guide
the teams responsible for developing new digital services.
ThecasestudiessuggestthatSAFerequiresstrongleadership
for effective deployment and to ensure that the implementation
adheres to the framework throughout all layers of an organi-
zation. LeSS works well in an environment where the service
is made for a single customer but does not fit well in highly
complex environments. The Spotify model seems to be better
suited for organizations with a relatively small service set. The
frameworks also differ in their guidance on how an organization
addresses internal factors, such as multiple service lines, the de-
gree of process complexity, and governance of EA and software
development.
SAFe seems to be broadly applicable, also for organizations
with a high degree of complexity. In contrast, the LeSS and
Spotify models seem best for organizations with one or more
focused service lines. The Spotify model provides very few
implementation guidelines. Our analysis suggests that organi-
zations should assess the current environment first to make an
informed choice for an ASF, including its EA, formulate their
requirements, and subsequently consider ASF’s advantages and
disadvantages specific to the organization.
2) Scope of ASF application: In case companies A and B,
ASFs cover the entire enterprise. In company C, they cover its
retail and wholesale banking divisions only. In all cases, the
scope includes both primary and supporting functions (B2C,
B2B, Finance, HR, etc.). Agile is most effective for front-office
applications and less effective for applications with fewer users
and back-office applications (e.g., interfaces between systems,
applications focusing on meeting regulatory requirements). In
the latter case, the iterative and interactive way of working does
not add much value, as requirements are often already known
from the outset.
3) Attention Paid to EA: Before the agile transformation, all
companies had a customized EA framework suitable to their
specific needs. Two of them used TOGAF for inspiration and
addedelementsfromotherEAframeworks.Thelarge-scaleagile
transformationchangedallarchitects’work,buttheEArolesand
processes remained unchanged. From an agile perspective, EA
initstraditionalformistooabstract,andtheProductOwnernow
carries out many activities of the traditional business architect.
Our cases show that this discrepancy makes EA redundant in
the transformation phase. However, the case companies that use
Agile company-wide need EA for consistency of the various
services that increasingly are being digitized. Solution architec-
tures cannot fill this gap, as they focus on project results only.
Therefore, in the application phase, the attention paid to EA has
increased. Interviewees agreed that the roles and accompanying
processes of EA need to be clearly defined before initiating a
large-scale agile transformation.
4) Waterfall retainment: Initially, the case companies
wantedtogetridoftheirtraditionalwaterfall-orientedapproach.
However,allcompaniesexperiencedthatsomewaterfall-related
characteristics of EA remained important in an agile context.
Therefore, business integrators and (enterprise and solution)
architects created implementation guidelines for agile teams.
Business managers and enterprise architects set up architecture
vision and roadmaps, and enterprise architects draft standards
and intentional architectures. Furthermore, the agile approach
turns out to be more effective for client and front office appli-
cations than for applications with fewer users and back-office
applications. In the latter case, the iterative and interactive way
of working does not add much value, as requirements are often
already known from the outset or no multidisciplinary change
issues exist that need attention.
5) Type of agile governance: Agile principle 11 states that
architectures should emerge from self-organizing teams [27].
This relates directly to our research question. This principle
holds true, but only under the right circumstances. Agile teams
need to be aligned with the organization’s overarching, ar-
chitectural vision and, therefore, should be supported by EA
governance. The task of an enterprise architect is not to control
agile teams, but to communicate the organization’s architecture
vision, international architectures, and roadmaps, and to ensure
priorities are carried out in logical order.
Our cases show that too much team autonomy and too little
direction setting by management negatively affect the effective
combinationofASFsandEA.Asaresult,managementresorted
to more traditional ways by explicitly setting directions and
adding new integrator roles next to the Product Owners to
secure end-to-end solutions and proper service delivery. These
adjustments indeed paid off due to more consistent service
development and delivery for customer services to seamlessly
interact at the enterprise level.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Erasmus Universiteit Rotterdam. Downloaded on January 10,2022 at 09:57:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

--- PAGE 11 ---
Thisarticlehasbeenacceptedforinclusioninafutureissueofthisjournal.Contentisfinalaspresented,withtheexceptionofpagination.
10 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ENGINEERING MANAGEMENT
In addition, QBR sessions are important checkpoints for
the direction the organization is heading. QBRs allow regular
progress monitoring and facilitate priority setting and intrateam
alignment of requirements. Communication between the tribes
has improved, and dependencies can be better managed. Archi-
tects are essential because they can quickly identify dependen-
cies between tribes and indicate when these should be discussed
in QBR sessions. Continuous management support, training,
and coaching about the agile mindset are required to ensure the
organization does not fall back into previous habits.
In the transformation phase, not all companies did equally
well. Company A took some time before choosing an ASF.
Company B initially gave too much autonomy to individual
departments to implement the ASF, resulting in misalignment,
and Company C got rid of its entire EA function. In the appli-
cation phase, all companies are successful, although each has
specificpointsofattention.CompanyAhasdifficultiesintegrat-
ing legacy systems in the agile way of working. Company B
struggles with the mindset of its middle management, who feel
their role has become less important, and Company C’s agile
culture is at stake.
The cross-case analysis showed that these three companies
had the following similarities.
1) Drivers for ASF implementation included reducing time-
to-market, improving flexibility in meeting customer de-
mands, lowering development costs, and strengthening
their competitive position.
2) ThescopeoftheASFcoveredbothprimaryandsupporting
functions.
3) The transformation significantly impacted the architects’
work,buttheEArolesandprocessesremainedunchanged.
Attention to EA dropped in the transformation phase but
increased in the application phase.
4) Waterfall-likedeliverablestosupportagileteamsincluded
architecture vision, intentional architectures, architecture
roadmaps, and implementation guidelines.
5) New integrator roles, better direction setting by man-
agement, and regular cross-team planning sessions were
implemented. Enterprise architects were responsible for
communicating the organization’s architecture vision, in-
tentional architectures, and roadmaps and ensuring that
priorities were met.
V. DISCUSSION
Scientific researchers have picked up the need for combining
large-scale Agile and EA. However, they disagree on the rela-
tionships between Agile and EA methods and how these can
strengthen each other [22]. In addition, it is unclear which as-
pectsofEAareimportantinan agilecontext and how enterprise
architects can adapt to the agile way of working [15], [68]. Our
longitudinalcasestudyofthreeservicecompaniesaddressesthis
research gap [22], [67]. It reveals organizational success factors
for effectively adopting EA and agile methods at scale:
1) first assess the roles and accompanying processes of EA
to assess their impact when working Agile;
2) leverage traditional waterfall-oriented characteristics
from the organizations’ EA to facilitate cross-team EA
coordination and balance team autonomy with top-down
guidance; and
3) adopt elements from other ASFs to amend deficiencies in
current ASFs as these do not provide sufficient guidance
on EA, even those that include EA considerations.
Before a large-scale agile transformation, an organization
should first assess the roles and accompanying processes of EA
that need to be redefined to make them fit for use in an agile
context at scale. They should formulate how to make EA roles
and processes effective during and after the agile organizational
transformation. Although literature [7], [41] suggests checking
organizational readiness and customizing the approach for agile
transformations in general, our article shows that this is also the
case for combining Agile and EA. EA in its traditional form
does not fit with the agile way of working. Solution architecture
appears to be ineffective as well because of its focus on project
results. Our findings suggest that without such precautions,
Agile may impact EA negatively, even with ASFs that provide
EAcoordinationmechanisms.Tothebestofourknowledge,this
phenomenon has never been identified in earlier studies.
Organizations should leverage traditional waterfall-oriented
characteristics from their EA approach and use these to com-
plement the chosen agile approach. Some traditional elements
are still required, such as integrator roles and related processes
facilitating cross-team EA coordination and balancing team
autonomy with top–down guidance. In agile governance, too
much team autonomy and too little direction setting by man-
agement are detrimental to the effectiveness of the combination
of ASFs and EA. Moreover, management support, training, and
coaching toward the agile mindset are required to ensure an
organization does not fall back to previous habits. Although
identified in [41], our article extends these requirements to the
combination of Agile and EA. EA is essential to maintain the
organization’s architectural vision throughout all agile teams.
Architects are expected to play an active and supporting role to
providedirectionacrossteamsthroughroadmapsandguidelines
[15], thereby balancing emerging and intentional architectures.
However, contrary to the suggestion of [67], the role of EA
should not just focus on technology but should also include
strategic and organizational aspects.
Because of a lack of detailed architectural governance, man-
agement resorted to some traditional EA roles and processes in
all three companies. Our findings confirm that companies can
benefitfromacombinationofexistingframeworksforAgileand
EA[60],[62],butthisdependsonhowthesecompaniesorganize
themselves [66]. ASFs do not provide sufficient guidance to
properly handle the transition from existing EA practices to an
Agile EA combination enterprise-wide [33], with SAFe appear-
ing more useful than Spotify or LeSS. Case companies B and C
did not initially opt for SAFe, but chose elements of SAFe later
onsincethisagileframeworkprovidesdetailsonhowtocombine
Agile with EA company-wide. But in company A, SAFe was
complemented with aspects of another agile framework instead
(notably Spotify). This extends the conclusion in [7] and [52] to
Authorized licensed use limited to: Erasmus Universiteit Rotterdam. Downloaded on January 10,2022 at 09:57:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

--- PAGE 12 ---
Thisarticlehasbeenacceptedforinclusioninafutureissueofthisjournal.Contentisfinalaspresented,withtheexceptionofpagination.
VAN WESSEL et al.: SCALING AGILE COMPANY-WIDE: ORGANIZATIONAL CHALLENGE OF COMBINING ASFs AND EA IN SERVICE COMPANIES 11
Fig. 1. Proposed conceptual model for future research.
the realm of ASF and EA that no ‘best’ approach for large-scale
agile development and application exists.
WealsoexaminedhowtheASFsaffectedtheservicesoffered
bythecaseorganizations,includingserviceinnovations(defined
as a new service or a renewal of an existing service, which
providesbenefitstotheorganizationthatdevelopedit[83]).Our
case companies aimed at both service and process innovations
but focused on better IT support. Most service innovations were
incremental. Company A has made significant improvements in
its digital channels for sales and support, resulting in increased
client satisfaction. It also reduced time to market, especially
in areas with straightforward service configurations. However,
not all departments implemented Agile. The company needs
more time to achieve service innovation for its telecom and
multimediaservices(e.g.,Internetprovision,interactiveTV,and
voice over Internet protocol (VoIP)). They have to adapt their
core IT systems to overcome legacy issues that hinder service
innovation that Tengstand et al. [54] also identified for SAFe.
The extent to which vendors can use this new way of working
is another bottleneck not mentioned in the literature, cf., [20].
In company B, the innovation capability improvements were
limited to incremental changes in services. The development
processes for new IT-supported services improved gradually.
In Company C, the agile implementation itself was a radical
process innovation. Service innovation was slightly faster, but
too much development time was spent on legacy systems and
meeting regulatory requirements. Only incremental changes in
services were achieved, such as functional additions in mobile
apps: small pieces of new functionality to increase for instance
customer self-service. Each company achieved better flexibility
in services development by better coordination among tribes
and squads. More innovations took place in processes than in
services. An explanation could be that these service companies
have to abide by various laws and regulations (e.g., related to
privacy and finance) that may hinder innovations. A second
reasoncouldberelatedtolegacysystemswhoseagileintegration
is difficult [54]. Other reasons may be a lack of cultural change
to transform organizational politics and to internalize an agile
mindset [18], [72].
A. Limitations and Threats to Validity
Our study has some limitations. First, we applied logical gen-
eralizationusingthreelargecasecompanies.Addingmorecases
could test and enrich our findings. Second, all three companies
had to cope with legacy systems, hindering innovation. Other
sectors might show more radical service innovations—a topic
for further research. It would be interesting to examine whether
our findings also hold for SMEs. Third, we only interviewed
a limited number of contractors per company. Interviewing
contractors employed by the same consultancy firm has the
advantage of obtaining better comparability between cases, but
future research could interview employees in different roles per
company.
We examined whether there were any typical threats to valid-
ity in our case study research [79], [81]. We addressed internal
validity(causeandeffectrelationshipbetweenourresearchpro-
cessandthederivedresults)byestablishingcausalrelationships
through pattern matching and explanation building in our cross-
case analysis using the identified codes from the ATLAS.TI
project file. External validity (generalizability of the derived
results) is addressed by means of analytical generalization.
Construct validity (Do examined concepts represent what the
researcherhasinmind?)wasaddressedbyprovidingdescriptive
texts for each construct in our questionnaire and by asking feed-
back on and confirmation of the transcripts. To counter research
bias, we used a case study protocol and recorded, transcribed,
and coded all interviews in a similar manner, and stored them in
a case study database.
B. Proposed Conceptual Model
Based on our longitudinal case studies, we could further
detail the constructs fromour integrated approach (Table II)and
get insight into relationships between them (see Fig. 1). “ASF
characteristics” are our independent variable and comprises
various ASF elements, such as the characteristics in Table I.
The “Scope of ASF application” is a mediating variable to the
“Type of agile governance.” The “Attention paid to EA” and
the level of “Waterfall retainment” act as mediating elements
contributing to the “Type of agile governance.” For the sake of
future research, we have added the construct “Process/service
innovation” because this shows the impact of the “Type of agile
governance.” Related impact variables include time-to-market
and the number of ideas successfully turned into products [84].
VI. CONCLUSION
Companies that use Agile company-wide need EA for the
consistency of the various services they offer and the processes
and systems supporting those services. We considered how
Authorized licensed use limited to: Erasmus Universiteit Rotterdam. Downloaded on January 10,2022 at 09:57:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

--- PAGE 13 ---
Thisarticlehasbeenacceptedforinclusioninafutureissueofthisjournal.Contentisfinalaspresented,withtheexceptionofpagination.
12 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ENGINEERING MANAGEMENT
organizations deal with the tension between Agile and EA in
large-scale agile transformations and how this can be effec-
tively mitigated through several governance mechanisms. Each
case organization moved from a single ASF implementation, of
which SAFe incorporates some EA coordination mechanisms,
toward a way of working by adding elements from other ASFs.
This suggests that each of these frameworks is insufficiently fit
for the transition from existing EA practices to a fruitful Agile
EA combination enterprise-wide, and that tailor-made solutions
are required. This brings us to our research question “What kind
of governance is needed in organizations to combine EA and
large-scale application of agile methods?”
Theagileteams,includingtheProductOwner,ScrumMaster,
and Agile Coach, need to be embedded in the Agile EA gover-
nance, which includes traditional management roles, architec-
ture roles, and supporting EA processes. An organization needs
to communicate its architectural vision top–down to all agile
teams regularly, outline intentional architectures and standards
to allow for long-term consistency between services at the en-
terprise level, and guide agile teams with architecture roadmaps
and implementation guidelines. Management should provide
top–downguidanceandacleardirectiontoagileteams.Business
departments influence the shaping of architecture roadmaps.
Cross-team planning (QBR) sessions for intrateam alignment
can be used as checkpoints for the organization’s direction.
Enterprise architects provide direction across agile teams while
overseeing service chains. They create intentional architectures,
quicklyidentifydependenciesbetweenagileteams,andindicate
whentheyshouldbediscussedinQBRs.Thisfacilitatespriority
settingacrossallagileteams,improvescommunicationbetween
teams, and facilitates managing dependencies. Lead architects
should work hands-on with the agile teams, ensure the roadmap
remains clear and impediments are removed, and monitor im-
plementations.
Even when reenvisioning EA in an agile context, some
waterfall-related characteristics of EA remain important and
should be maintained. Therefore, the organization should lever-
age value-adding waterfall-oriented characteristics from EA
approaches and use these to complement a hybrid ASF. On the
one hand, this more balanced way of thinking will benefit orga-
nizations, as people involved in agile projects tend to be project
focused and have less attention for the broader business per-
spective. On the other hand, enterprise architects need to adapt
considerably when an organization transforms to an agile way
ofworking.Activeinvolvementinanorganization’sgovernance
allows architects to maintain the organization’s architectural
vision throughout all agile teams. These new insights contribute
totheAgilebodyofknowledgeand,morespecifically,thetheory
on agile methods and large-scale agile transformations.
Based on the empirical findings, we proposed several gov-
ernance mechanisms in an Agile EA context to enhance the
development of coherent services and increase the overall flex-
ibility of a service organization. Researchers can replicate our
qualitativeapproachindifferentregionsandsectorsandvalidate
our findings in these settings. As service companies must deal
withlawsandregulations,futureresearchcouldlookintosectors
that are less regulated and what that would mean for the level of
innovations realized. Other suggestions for future research in-
clude measuring performance indicators for process and service
innovations, such as speed and cost of development, monitoring
the Agile EA combination, and allowing further improvements.
Our model (see Fig. 1) can be used as a starting point.
This article is of practical relevance for organizations that
apply agile methods for larger projects or larger companies.
It shows lessons learned from case organizations on applying
ASFsandintegratingEA.Ourresearchsuggeststhatcombining
an agile way of working and EA enhances service development
and delivery, process innovation, and ultimately the overall
flexibility of an organization, provided the following conditions
are met:
1) redefine EA and accompanying roles and processes based
onthespecificorganizationalneedsbeforeanylarge-scale
agile transformation;
2) preserve some stage-gate elements of EA, such as front-
end (intentional) architectures, roadmaps, and implemen-
tation guidelines to counterbalance a rigid agile imple-
mentation; and
3) facilitate cross-team EA coordination, balance team au-
tonomy with top–down guidance, and ensure continuous
attention to maintain the organization’s architectural vi-
sion throughout all agile teams in close cooperation with
Business stakeholders.
Organizations should seriously consider an agile transforma-
tionthatincludesEAintheiragilegovernance.Todoso,organi-
zations can empower themselves by enabling their architects to
properlymanagethetransformationtoanAgileEAoftomorrow.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank the interviewees who took
part in the interviews despite their busy schedules and the guest
editors and four anonymous reviewers for their constructive
comments.
REFERENCES
[1] D.Helbing,S.Balietti,S.Bishop,andP.Lukowicz,“Understanding,creat-
ing, and managing complex techno-socio-economic systems: Challenges
and perspectives,” Eur. Phys. J. Special Topics, vol. 195, pp. 165–186,
2011.
[2] P.WeillandS.L.Woerner,“Thrivinginanincreasinglydigitalecosystem,”
MIT Sloan Manage. Rev., vol. 56, no. 4, pp. 27–34, 2015.
[3] G. Lee and W. Xia, “Toward agile: An integrated analysis of quantitative
and qualitative field data on software development agility,” MIS Quart.,
vol. 34, no. 1, pp. 87–114, 2010.
[4] K. Schwab, “Globalization 4.0: Shaping a global architecture in the
age of the fourth industrial revolution. The Davos 2019 manifesto,”
Geneva, Switzerland, World Economic Forum, White Paper, 2018.
[Online]. Available: https://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_
Globalization_4.0_Call_for_Engagement.pdf
[5] E. Overby, A. Bharadwaj, and V. Sambamurthy, “Enterprise agility and
the enabling role of information technology,” Eur. J. Inf. Syst., vol. 15,
no. 2, pp. 120–131, 2006.
[6] M. West and D. Norton, “Market guide for enterprise agile frameworks,”
Gartner,2017.Accessed:Mar.22,2020.[Online].Available:https://www.
gartner.com/document/3762264
[7] D. K. Rigby, J. Sutherland, and A. Noble, “Agile at scale. How to go from
a few teams to hundreds,” Harvard Bus. Rev., vol. 96, no. 3, pp. 88–96,
2018.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Erasmus Universiteit Rotterdam. Downloaded on January 10,2022 at 09:57:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

--- PAGE 14 ---
Thisarticlehasbeenacceptedforinclusioninafutureissueofthisjournal.Contentisfinalaspresented,withtheexceptionofpagination.
VAN WESSEL et al.: SCALING AGILE COMPANY-WIDE: ORGANIZATIONAL CHALLENGE OF COMBINING ASFs AND EA IN SERVICE COMPANIES 13
[8] T. Dingsøyr and N. B. Moe, “Towards principles of large-scale agile de-
velopment,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Agile Softw. Develop., Cham, Switzerland,
2014, pp. 1–8.
[9] K. Petersen and C. Wohlin, “A comparison of issues and advantages
in agile and incremental development between state of the art and an
industrial case,” J. Syst. Softw., vol. 82, no. 9, pp. 1479–1490, 2009.
[10] J. W. Ross, P. Weill, and D. Robertson, Enterprise Architecture as Strat-
egy: Creating a Foundation For Business Execution. Boston, MA, USA:
Harvard Business School Press, 2006.
[11] W. F. Boh and D. Yellin, “Using enterprise architecture standards in
managing information technology,” J. Manage. Inf. Syst., vol. 23, no. 3,
pp. 163–207, 2006.
[12] M. M. Lankhorst, “Introduction to enterprise architecture,” in Enterprise
Architecture at Work, Berlin, Germany: Springer, pp. 10–19, 2013.
[13] T. Dingsøyr, N. B. Moe, T. E. Fægri, and E. A. Seim, “Exploring software
development at the very large-scale: A revelatory case study and research
agenda for agile method adaptation,” Empirical Softw. Eng., vol. 23, no. 1,
pp. 490–520, 2018.
[14] M. T. Gamble, “Can metamodels link development to design intent,?” in
Proc. IEEE/ACM 1st Int. Workshop Bringing Architectural Des. Thinking
Developers’ Daily Activities, 2016, pp. 14–17.
[15] Ö. Uludağ, M. Kleehaus, X. Xu, and F. Matthes, “Investigating the role of
architects in scaling agile frameworks,” in Proc. IEEE 21st Int. Enterprise
Distrib. Object Comput. Conf., 2017, pp. 123–132.
[16] S. Nerur and V. Balijepally, “Theoretical reflections on agile development
methodologies,” Commun. ACM, vol. 50, no. 3, pp. 79–83, 2007.
[17] C. Maples, “Enterprise agile transformation: The two-year wall,” in Proc.
2009 Agile Conf., 2009, pp. 90–95.
[18] A. Putta, Ö. Uludağ, M. Paasivaara, and S. L. Hong, “Benefits and
challenges of adopting SAFe-An empirical survey,” in Proc. Int. Conf.
Agile Softw. Develop., Cham, Switzerland, 2021, pp. 172–187.
[19] S. Bente, U. Bombosch, and S. Langade, Collaborative Enterprise Ar-
chitecture: Enriching EA with Lean, Agile, and Enterprise 2.0 Practices.
Amsterdam, The Netherlands: Elsevier, 2012.
[20] C. Yang, P. Liang, and P. Avgeriou, “A systematic mapping study on
the combination of software architecture and agile development,” J. Syst.
Softw., vol. 111, pp. 157–184, 2016.
[21] P.Kruchten,“Contextualizingagilesoftwaredevelopment,”J.Softw.,Evol.
Process, vol. 25, no. 4, pp. 351–361, 2013.
[22] Ö. Uludağ, P. Philipp, A. Putta, M. Paasivaara, C. Lassenius, and F.
Matthes, “Revealing the state-of-the-art in large-scale agile development:
A systematic mapping study,” J. Syst. Softw., to be published. [Online].
Available: https://arxiv.org/ftp/arxiv/papers/2007/2007.05578.pdf
[23] T. Mikaelian, D. J. Nightingale, D. H. Rhodes, and D. E. Hastings, “Real
options in enterprise architecture: A holistic mapping of mechanisms and
types for uncertainty management,” IEEE Trans. Eng. Manag., vol. 58,
no. 3, pp. 457–470, Aug. 2011.
[24] W. W. Royce, “Managing the development of large software systems:
Concepts and techniques,” in Proc. 9th int. Conf. Softw. Eng., 1987,
pp. 328–338.
[25] L. Cocco, K. Mannaro, G. Concas, and M. Marchesi, “Simulating kanban
and scrum vs. waterfall with system dynamics,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Agile
Softw. Develop., 2011, pp. 117–131.
[26] N. M. A. Munassar and A. Govardhan, “A comparison between five
models of software engineering,” Int. J. Comput. Sci. Issues, vol. 7, no. 5,
pp. 94–101, 2010.
[27] K. Beck et al., “Manifesto for agile software development,” 2001, Ac-
cessed: Dec. 1, 2021. [Online]. Available: https://agilemanifesto.org/
[28] C. Larman and V. R. Basili, “Iterative and incremental developments: A
brief history,” Computer, vol. 36, no. 6, pp. 47–56, 2003.
[29] B. Boehm and R. Turner, “Using risk to balance agile and plan-driven
methods,” Computer, vol. 36, no. 6, pp. 57–66, 2003.
[30] A. Cockburn and J. Highsmith, “Agile software development, the people
factor,” Computer, vol. 34, no. 11, pp. 131–133, 2001.
[31] M. V. Tatikonda and S. R. Rosenthal, “Technology novelty, project com-
plexity, and product development project execution success: A deeper
look at task uncertainty in product innovation,” IEEE Trans. Eng. Manag.,
vol. 47, no. 1, pp. 74–87, Feb. 2000.
[32] J.Chen,R.R.Reilly,andG.S.Lynn,“TheimpactsofSpeed-to-Marketon
new product success: The moderating effects of uncertainty,” IEEE Trans.
Eng. Manag., vol. 52, no. 2, pp. 199–212, May 2005.
[33] Ö. Uludağ, A. Putta, M. Paasivaara, and F. Matthes, “Evolution of the
agilescalingframeworks,”inProc.Int.Conf.AgileSoftw.Develop.,Cham,
Switzerland, 2021, pp. 123–139.
[34] M.CoramandS.Bohner,“Theimpactofagilemethodsonsoftwareproject
management,” in Proc. 12th IEEE Int. Conf. Workshops Eng. Comput.-
Based Syst., 2005, pp. 363–370.
[35] B. Hobbs and Y. Petit, “Agile methods on large projects in large organiza-
tions,” Project Manage. J., vol. 48, no. 3, pp. 3–19, 2017.
[36] G. Van Waardenburg and H. Van Vliet, “When agile meets the enterprise,”
Inf. Softw. Technol., vol. 55, no. 12, pp. 2154–2171, 2013.
[37] G. Theocharis, M. Kuhrmann, J. Münch, and P. Diebold, “Is water-scrum-
fall reality? On the use of agile and traditional development practices,”
in Proc. Int. Conf. Product-Focused Softw. Process Improvement, 2015,
pp. 149–166.
[38] L. Mahadevan, W. J. Kettinger, and T. O. Meservy, “Running on hybrid:
Control changes when introducing an agile methodology in a traditional
‘Waterfall’ system development environment,” Commun. Assoc. Inf. Syst.,
vol. 36, no. 5, 2015, Art. no. 5.
[39] D. Batra, W. Xia, D. E. Van der Meer, and K. Dutta, “Balancing agile
and structured development approaches to successfully manage large
distributed software projects: A case study from the cruise line industry,”
Commun. Assoc. Inf. Syst., vol. 27, no. 1, 2010, Art. no. 21.
[40] G. Marzi, F. Ciampi, D. Dalli, and M. Dabic, “New product development
during the last ten years: The ongoing debate and future avenues,” IEEE
Trans. Eng. Manag., vol. 68, no. 1, pp. 330–344, Feb. 2021.
[41] K. Dikert, M. Paasivaara, and C. C. Lassenius, , “Challenges and suc-
cess factors for large-scale agile transformations: A systematic literature
review,” J. Syst. Softw., vol. 119, pp. 87–108, 2016.
[42] R. G. Cooper, “Agile–Stage-Gate hybrids: The next stage for product
development blending agile and stage-gate methods can provide flexibil-
ity, speed, and improved communication in new-product development,”
Res.-Technol. Manage., vol. 59, no. 1, pp. 21–29, 2016.
[43] S. Hastie and S. Wojewoda, “Standish group 2015 chaos report.” Ac-
cessed: Aug. 28, 2021. [Online]. Available: https://www.infoq.com/
articles/standish-chaos-2015
[44] A. Solinski and K. Petersen, “Prioritizing agile benefits and limitations in
relation to practice usage,” Softw. Qual. J., vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 447–482,
2016.
[45] A. Tarhan and S. G. Yilmaz, “Systematic analyses and comparison of
development performance and product quality of incremental process
and agile process,” Inf. Softw. Technol., vol. 56, no. 5, pp. 477–494,
2014.
[46] H. C. Estler, M. Nordio, C. A. Furia, B. Meyer, and J. Schneider, “Agile
vs. structured distributed software development: A case study,” Empirical
Softw. Eng., vol. 19, no. 5, pp. 1197–1224, 2014.
[47] M. Bianchi, G. Marzi, and M. M. Guerini, “Agile, stage-gate and their
combination:Exploring how they relate to performancein software devel-
opment,” J. Bus. Res., vol. 110, pp. 538–553, 2020.
[48] Z. Zhang and H. Sharifi, “Towards theory building in agile manufacturing
strategy—A taxonomical approach,” IEEE Trans. Eng. Manag., vol. 54,
no. 2, pp. 351–370, May 2007.
[49] J. Werewka and A. Spiechowicz, “Enterprise architecture approach to
SCRUMprocesses,sprintretrospectiveexample,”inProc.FederatedConf.
Comput. Sci. Inf. Syst., 2017, pp. 1221–1228.
[50] VersionOne, “15th annual state of agile report,” 2021. Accessed: Aug.
28, 2021. [Online]. Available: https://stateofagile.versionone.com/
[51] T. Dybå and T. Dingsøyr, “Empirical studies of agile software devel-
opment: A systematic review,” Inf. Softw. Technol., vol. 50, no. 9-10,
pp. 833–859, 2008.
[52] C. Fuchs and T. Hess, “Becoming agile in the digital transformation: The
process of a large-scale agile transformation,,” in Proc. 39th Int. Conf. Inf.
Syst., San Francisco, CA, USA, 2018, pp. 1–17.
[53] T. Gustavsson, “Dynamics of inter-team coordination routines in large-
scale agile software development,” in Proc. 27th Eur. Conf. Inf. Syst.,
Uppsala, Sweden, 2019, pp. 1–16.
[54] S.N.Tengstrand,P.Tomaszewski,M.Borg,andR.Jabangwe,“Challenges
of adopting SAFe in the banking Industry–A study two years after its in-
troduction,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Agile Softw. Develop., Cham, Switzerland,
2021, pp. 157–171.
[55] DIN/DKE, “German standardization roadmap version 2,” Berlin, Ger-
many: DKE, 2016.
[56] J. A. Zachman, “A framework for information systems architecture,” IBM
Syst. J., vol. 26, no. 3, pp. 276–292, 1987.
[57] Q. Bui, “Evaluating enterprise architecture frameworks using essential
elements,” Commun. Assoc. Inf. Syst., vol. 41, pp. 121–149, 2017.
[58] S. Murer and B. Bonati, Managed Evolution: A Strategy For Very Large
InformationSystems.Berlin,Germany:SpringerScienceBusinessMedia,
2010.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Erasmus Universiteit Rotterdam. Downloaded on January 10,2022 at 09:57:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

--- PAGE 15 ---
Thisarticlehasbeenacceptedforinclusioninafutureissueofthisjournal.Contentisfinalaspresented,withtheexceptionofpagination.
14 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ENGINEERING MANAGEMENT
[59] T.Tamm,P.B.Seddon,G.Shanks,andP.Reynolds,“Howdoesenterprise
architecture add value to organisations?,” Commun. Assoc. Inf. Syst.,
vol. 28, pp. 141–168, 2011.
[60] M. Hauder, S. Roth, C. Schulz, and F. Matthes, “Agile enterprise architec-
ture management: An analysis on the application of agile principles,” in
Proc. 4th Int. Symp. Bus. Model. Softw. Des., 2014, pp. 38–46.
[61] S. Kotusev, “TOGAF-based enterprise architecture practice: An ex-
ploratory case study,” Commun. Assoc. Inf. Syst., vol. 43, pp. 321–359,
2018.
[62] M. M. Lankhorst, W. P. M. Janssen, H. A. Proper, and M. W. A. Steen,
“Introducing agile service development,” in Agile Service Development,
Berlin, Germany: Springer, 2012, pp. 1–15.
[63] R. M. Foorthuis, M. van Steenbergen, S. Brinkkemper, and W. Bruls, “A
theory building study of enterprise architecture practices and benefits,”
Information Systems Frontiers, vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 541–564, 2016.
[64] J. W. Ross, C. M. Beath, and M. Mocker, Designed For Digital: How to
Architect Your Business For Sustained Success. Cambridge, MA, USA:
MIT Press, 2019.
[65] Ö. Uludağ, H. A. Proper, and F. Matthes, “Investigating the establishment
ofarchitectureprinciplesforsupportinglarge-scaleagiletransformations,”
in Proc. IEEE 23rd Int. Enterprise Distrib. Object Comput. Conf., 2019,
pp. 41–50.
[66] S. Hanschke, J. Ernsting, and H. Kuchen, “Integrating agile software de-
velopmentandenterprisearchitecturemanagement,”inProc.48thHawaii
Int. Conf. Syst. Sci., 2015, pp. 4099–4108.
[67] Ö. Uludağ, M. Kleehaus, N. Reiter, and F. Matthes, “What to expect from
enterprise architects in large-scale agile development? A multiple-case
study,” in Proc. 25th Amer. Conf. Inf. Syst., Cancun, Mexico, 2019,
pp. 1–10.
[68] R.Duijs,P.Ravesteyn,andM.vanSteenbergen,“Adaptationofenterprise
architecture efforts to an agile environment,” in Proc. Bled eConf., 2018,
pp. 389–400.
[69] B. Mucambe, A. P. Tereso, J. M. P. Faria, and T. Mateus, “Large-Scale
agile frameworks: Dealing with interdependences,” in Proc. 33rd Int. Bus.
Inf. Manage. Assoc. Conf., 2019, pp. 3109–3119.
[70] B. Horlach, A. Drechsler, I. Schirmer, and P. Drews, “Everyone’s going to
beanarchitect:Designprinciplesforarchitecturalthinkinginagileorgani-
zations,” in Proc. 53rd Hawaii Int. Conf. Syst. Sci., 2020, pp. 6197–6206.
[71] S. Buckl, F. Matthes, I. Monahov, S. Roth, C. Schulz, and C. M. Schweda,
“Towards an agile design of the enterprise architecture management func-
tion,” in Proc. IEEE 15th Int. Enterprise Distrib. Object Comput. Conf.
Workshops, 2011, pp. 322–329.
[72] Ö. Uludağ, S. Nägele, and M. Hauder, “Establishing architecture guide-
lines in large-scale agile development through institutional pressures: A
single-case study,” in Proc. 25th Amer. Conf. Inf. Syst., 2019, pp. 1–10.
[73] M.Berntzen,V.Stray,andN.B.Moe,“Coordinationstrategies:Managing
Inter-teamcoordinationchallengesinlarge-scaleagile,”inProc.Int.Conf.
Agile Softw. Develop., Cham, Switzerland, 2021, pp. 140–156.
[74] T. Dingsøyr, N. B. Moe, and E. A. Seim, “Coordinating knowledge work
in multiteam programs: Findings from a large-scale agile development
program,” Project Manage. J., vol. 49, no. 6, pp. 64–77, 2018.
[75] B. Horlach, T. Böhmann, I. Schirmer, and P. Drews, “IT governance in
scaling agile frameworks,” in Proc. Multi-conf, Bus. Inform., Lüneburg,
Germany, 2018, pp. 1789–1800.
[76] S. B. Bacharach, “Organizational theories: Some criteria for evaluation,”
Acad. Manage. Rev., vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 496–515, 1989.
[77] P. G. Keen, Shaping the Future: Business Design Through Information
Technology, Boston, MA, USA: Harvard Business School Press, 1991.
[78] P. Weill and J. W. Ross, IT Governance: How Top Performers Manage
IT Decision Rights For Superior Results, Boston, MA, USA: Harvard
Business Press, 2004.
[79] R. K. Yin, Case Study Research Design and Methods, 5th ed. Thousand
Oaks, CA, USA: Sage, 2014.
[80] D. S. Cruzes and T. Dyba, “Recommended steps for thematic synthesis in
software engineering,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Empirical Softw. Eng. Meas.,
2011, pp. 275–284.
[81] P. Runeson and M. Höst, “Guidelines for conducting and reporting case
study research in software engineering,” Empirical Softw. Eng., vol. 14,
no. 2, pp. 131–164, 2009.
[82] K. O’Reilly, D. Paper, and S. Marx, “Demystifying grounded theory for
business research,” Org. Res. Methods, vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 247–262, 2012.
[83] M. Toivonen and T. Tuominen, “Emergence of innovations in services,”
Serv. Ind. J., vol. 29, no. 7, pp. 887–902, 2009.
[84] M.DziallasandK.Blind,“Innovationindicatorsthroughouttheinnovation
process:Anextensiveliteratureanalysis,”Technovation,vol.80,pp. 3–29,
2019.
Robert M. van Wessel received the master’s degree
inelectricalengineeringfromTwenteUniversity,En-
schede, The Netherlands, in 1992, and the Ph.D. de-
gree in business administration from the Department
of Information Systems and Management, Tilburg
University, Tilburg, The Netherlands, in 2008.
He is a Lecturer and Thesis Coach with the Rot-
terdam School of Management, Erasmus University,
Rotterdam, The Netherlands. He is a Business Advi-
sor with the Dutch Government Agency ICTU and is
the founder of Apexis, a firm that provides consul-
tancy services in his research fields, which include the interaction of business
andinformation technology,in particular agilemethods, enterprise architecture,
information, and data management, information security and privacy, and stan-
dardization.
Dr. van Wessel was the recipient of the Aart Bosman Award 2008–2009 as
best Information Management thesis in the Benelux.
Philip Kroon received the bachelor’s degree in eco-
nomicsfromUtrechtUniversity,Utrecht,TheNether-
lands, in 2016, and the master’s degree (cum laude)
in business information management from the Rot-
terdam School of Management, Erasmus University,
Rotterdam, The Netherlands, in 2018.
In his professional work, he advises multination-
als on ITM&A related challenges (e.g., system inte-
gration, data migration, and decommissioning) and
guides clients to realize their desired agile business
transformations as a SAFe Program Consultant. His
academic research interests include the adoption of agile-scaling frameworks
in organizations and their impact on the traditional enterprise architecture
capability.
Henk J. de Vries graduated as a Geodetic Engineer
from the Delft University of Technology, Delft, The
Netherlands,in1982,andreceivedthePh.D.degreein
businessadministrationfromtheErasmusUniversity,
Rotterdam, The Netherlands, in 1999.
From 1984 to 2003, he was with The Nether-
landsStandardizationInstituteNENindifferentroles.
Since 1994, he has been an Assistant Professor
and Associate Professor with Innovation Manage-
mentDepartment,RotterdamSchoolofManagement
(RSM), Erasmus University. In 2018, he was ap-
pointed as a Professor of standardization management, Department of Technol-
ogyandOperationsManagement,RSM,ErasmusUniversity,SectionInnovation
Management. He is also a Visiting Professor with the Faculty of Technology,
Policy and Management, Delft University of Technology. He studies standard-
ization from a business point of view and is the author or coauthor of more than
400 publications, including 20 books.
Prof.deVrieswasthePresidentoftheEuropeanAcademyforStandardization
from 2010 to 2021. He was the recipient of the International Organization
for Standardization ISO Award for his education on standardization as best
in the world in 2009. The majority of his Ph.D. students received a National or
International Best Dissertation Award.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Erasmus Universiteit Rotterdam. Downloaded on January 10,2022 at 09:57:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.