--- PAGE 1 ---
A Study on Digital Governance Framework
Based on Enterprise Architecture: Taking Clean
Energy Enterprise (China Three Gorges
Corporation) as an Example
Qiyuan Xiao, Qiang Zhu(B), Jiawen Yu, and Yufei Zhuang
China Three Gorges Corporation, No.1 Liuhe Road, Jiangan District, Wuhan, China
{xiao_qiyuan,zhu_qiang,yu_jiawen,zhuang_yufei}@ctg.com.cn
Abstract. Amidst the global proliferation of digital technologies, digital trans-
formation has emerged as a strategic imperative for energy enterprises seeking
operationalexcellence.ThisstudyintroducesaFour-DimensionalRuleEnterprise
Architecture(FDR-EA)frameworkthatinnovativelyextendstraditionalEnterprise
Architecture (EA) theory. The proposed framework systematically integrates four
governancedimensions:strategicalignment,processreengineering, datasteward-
ship, and technological enablement. Through its hierarchical architecture, FDR-
EA establishes a systematic digital governance framework, bridging strategy with
operation. A practical implementation case from China Three Gorges Corpora-
tion (CTG) demonstrates how the framework enhances digital-business integra-
tion through value stream optimization. Furthermore, the study explores future
directions for digital technology adoption in clean energy operations under the
FDR-EA framework. These findings demonstrate that FDR-EA can provide a
robust methodology for clean energy enterprises to achieve agile and intelligent
digital transformation while maintaining strategic coherence.
Keywords: Four dimension rule(FDR) · digital transformation · clean energy ·
TOGAF · Enterprise Architecture(EA)
1 Introduction
Digital transformation has entered a new stage, driven by emerging technologies such
as artificial intelligence (AI), cloud computing, and the Internet of Things (IoT).
Organizationsacrossindustriesarecompelledtoadoptthesetechnologiestoenhance
andoptimizeoperations.However,theroadtodigitaltransformationforanyorganisation
is not an easy path. The dynamic nature of digital world itself would bring its own
obstacles particularly the stability in business development, let alone the pressure of
rapid information technology advancement and cultural identity within organisations
brings.
© The Author(s) 2026
Y. Hu et al. (Eds.): IHDC 2025, LNCE 792, pp. 578–587, 2026.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-95-4889-7_51

--- PAGE 2 ---
A Study on Digital Governance Framework Based on Enterprise Architecture 579
Toaddressthesechallenges,EnterpriseArchitecture(EA)hasbecomeakeysolution.
Derivedfromsystemstheory,EAprovidesastructuredframeworktoalignbusinesswith
IT, navigating enterprise to safely cross the intricacies of digital world. Since its birth,
EAhasbeeninstrumentalinharmonizingbusinessprocesses,dataflows,andtechnology
stacks,leadingtoenhanceoperationalefficiencyandagilityinvariousindustries.Inman-
ufacturing, EA has facilitated the integration of IoT technologies, resulting in reducing
predictive maintenance and smart production systems downtime by up to 30%. Simi-
larly, in healthcare, EA has streamlined the integration of patient data across disparate
systems, improving clinical decision-making and patient outcomes.
This article begins with a discussion of the origin and the development of EA.
The FDR-EA design for clean energy enterprises will then be introduced, followed
by the application of FDR-EA in China Three Gorges Group(CTG). Subsequently,
ways to build a new energy system that is ‘data-connected, technologically agile, and
multi-energy-complementary’ with FDR-EA is discussed. Finally, the paper concludes
with recommendations for FDR-EA used in digital transformation for clean energy
enterprises.
2 The Origin and the Development of EA
Enterprise Architecture (EA) originated from John Zachman’s pioneering research
in information system construction in 1987, and as a theoretical system that deeply
integrates enterprise strategy with business and technology, EA provides systematic
methodological support for enterprise digital transformation.
The core goal of EA is to build an integrated environment to support the compre-
hensive implementation of enterprise strategy by coordinating business and information
technology (IT) within an enterprise to build an integrated environment that supports
the comprehensive implementation of enterprise strategy.
Although a variety of frameworks have been developed by different organisations
for the study of EA, resulting in its scope and purpose not yet being fully unified, the
current understanding of EA can be summarised into two main categories:
System-based definition: According to the ISO/IEC/IEEE 42010:2011 standard, EA
isdefinedasasystemthatencompassesitscomponents,interrelationships,environments,
andprinciplesthatguideitsdesignandevolution.Thisdefinitionemphasisesthedynamic
and systemic nature of EA, arguing that EA should evolve through the various stages
of an organisation’s life cycle in order to adapt to changes in the internal and external
environment.
Definition based on organisational rules: EA is also seen as a discipline that man-
ages the basic organisation of a firm, dealing with its components, interrelationships,
environment and the principles that guide the design and development of the firm. This
definition focuses more on the role of EA as the internal rules of the enterprise and
emphasises its ability to unify and coordinate the strategy, business and technology of
the enterprise.

--- PAGE 3 ---
580 Q. Xiao et al.
Therefore, whether from the perspective of system evolution or organisational rules,
EA is a top-level design approach that requires a comprehensive consideration of the
enterprise strategy and business big picture. Unlike specific information systems or
modelling approaches, EA does not provide tools or models for a specific domain, but
rather provides methodological guidance for the enterprise as a whole to help it achieve
its strategic goals in digital transformation.
As a top-level design methodology, EA needs a series of tools or models as a grip to
guide digital transformation in practice. Enterprise architecture frameworks are impor-
tant tools to guide enterprises in designing business processes, information systems,
organisationalstructuresandgovernancemechanisms.CommonEAframeworksinclude
Zachman Framework, TOGAF and DoDAF, etc., which provide enterprises with stan-
dardised approaches and best practices for architecture design from different perspec-
tives. By adopting the right EA framework, enterprises can better adapt to the needs of
digital transformation, optimise resource allocation, and improve operational efficiency
to achieve strategic goals.
3 The Enterprise Architecture Design with the Four Dimension
Rule(FDR-EA)
As a systematic methodology, EA can provide clear rules and methods for digital
transformation of clean energy enterprises.
By building a four-dimensional rule enterprise architecture (FDR-EA) of ‘strategy
decoding - process reconstruction - data governance - technology adaptation’ (Fig. 2)
basedontraditionalEA,itcansystematicallysolvetheproblemofmissingmethodology
in the process of digital transformation. This system not only helps enterprises decom-
pose digital transformation strategy into executable tasks, but also ensures the optimal
allocationofinternalresourcesthroughprocessreconstructionanddatagovernance,and
realises a high degree of synergy between technology and business through technology
adaptation (Fig. 1).
1. Strategy Decoding Rule: From Top-Level Design to Executable Paths
Strategy decoding is the starting point of digital transformation, which involves
breaking down macro-strategies (e.g. ‘dual-carbon target’, ‘multi-energy complemen-
tarity’) into specific technical indicators and architectural requirements. For example,
through the TOGAF architecture methodology, the goal of ‘building a world-class clean
energy group’ is broken down into digital sub-strategies such as intelligent scheduling,
carbon asset management, and virtual power plant, and a strategy-business-IT mapping
relationship is established to ensure that technology inputs accurately support business
goals.
2. ProcessReconstructionRule:BreakingDownBarriersandBuildingAgileOperations
Business processes in traditional energy companies are often fragmented and slow
to respond. Process re-engineering needs to be based on a standardised framework (e.g.
APQC)tooptimisecross-sectorcollaborationmodels.Forexample,inthejointschedul-
ing of wind, light, water and storage, redundant approval nodes can be merged and

--- PAGE 4 ---
A Study on Digital Governance Framework Based on Enterprise Architecture 581
Fig. 1. The Four-Dimensional Rule
an automated decision-making mechanism can be introduced to reduce the scheduling
response time from the hourly level to the minute level. At the same time, agile methods
such as DevOps are used to accelerate the digital delivery of new energy projects.
3. Data governance Rule: building a unified data asset system
Data silos are the core bottleneck constraining the construction of smart energy
systems. Effective data governance requires the establishment of a three-tier data asset
catalogue(group-level,business-level,andequipment-level)andreal-timefusionofdata
from multiple sources through technologies such as data lakes and stream computing

--- PAGE 5 ---
582 Q. Xiao et al.
(e.g., Flink). In addition, data quality standards need to be established to ensure the
reliability of analytical models.
4. Technology Adaptation Rule: Dynamic Integration of Emerging Technologies
Smart energy systems need to continuously absorb new technologies such as AI,
blockchain and digital twin. The key to technology adaptation is to: establish a tech-
nology radar mechanism to regularly assess the maturity of technologies such as AIGC
(intelligent dispatch command generation), 5G + Beidou (precise positioning), etc.;
adopt a micro-service architecture to ensure that the system can be flexibly scaled up,
for example, by quickly accessing a new type of photovoltaic prediction algorithm; set
up an experimental validation environment and verify the feasibility of the new tech-
nologies in pilot power stations (e.g., Xiangjiaba), so as to reduce the risk of scaled-up
application.
4 Application of FDR-EA in China Three Gorges Group(CTG)
4.1 The Challenges in Digital Transformation
At present, Three Gorges Group is at the key point of creating a world-class demonstra-
tionenterpriseandconstructingaworld-classcleanenergygroup,makingeveryeffortto
accelerate the all-round and deep integration of digitalisation and CTG’s business, pro-
moting digital industrialisation and industrial digitisation, establishing a digital ecology
of clean energy and ecological and environmental protection industries, and promoting
CTG’s comprehensive development of the digital economy, which is the key link to
reconstructing CTG’s core competitiveness and realising CTG’s goals.
However, there are still some deficiencies in CTG’s digital development under the
new situation.
Insufficient data value mining, restricting intelligent decision-making ability. Cur-
rently CTG lacks an efficient data analysis model and intelligent application system,
making it difficult to realise the optimisation of the all-factor, all-process energy sys-
tem. Insufficient data insight and agility limits the ability to fine-tune operations and
risk prediction, affecting the dynamic regulation effectiveness of the intelligent energy
system.
Data Silos Impede Multi-energy Synergy and Ecological Integration. Heteroge-
neous systems and decentralised data architecture have led to difficulties in business
collaboration, and data from clean energy, hydropower, energy storage and other sectors
are not interoperable, making it difficult to support intelligent scheduling and cross-
business optimisation of the multi-energy complementary system, and hampering the
development of ‘source-grid-load-storage’ integration.
Weak digital ecosystem and insufficient innovation momentum. There is a lack of
industry-leadingdigitaltechnologyverificationplatformsandindustrygatheringecosys-
tems,andthetransformationoftraditionalenergybusinessisslow;digitaltalentreserves
and incentive mechanisms are imperfect, and the independently controllable R&D sys-
tem for smart energy technologies has yet to take shape, which restricts the in-depth
integration of AI, blockchain and other technologies with the energy system.

--- PAGE 6 ---
A Study on Digital Governance Framework Based on Enterprise Architecture 583
In the future, it is necessary to reconstruct the data governance system around the
enterprise architecture (EA), open the data chain, technology chain and value chain, and
buildanopenandcollaborativedigitalecosystem,soastosupporttheefficientoperation
of the intelligent energy system and the landing of the ‘dual-carbon’ goal.
4.2 Application of FDR-EA
Inthecontextofdigitaltransformation,CTGcanrelyontheFDRs-EAtobuildanintelli-
gent,collaborativeandefficientcleanenergymanagementsystem.Throughasystematic
approach, the system transforms corporate strategy into digital capabilities that can be
implemented on the ground, helping to crack the ‘data silos’, improve decision-making
intelligence, and optimise multi-energy complementary operations.
As one of the most widely used enterprise architectures currently used to guide
the practical application of enterprise management, TOGAF provides a methodology
and tools to assist in the acceptance, production, use and maintenance of enterprise
architectures, and is based on an iterative process model supplemented by best practices
and a set of reusable existing architecture assets.
In practice, CTG has selected TOGAF as the methodology for the design of Enter-
prise Architecture for architecture construction. According to TOGAF’s architecture
development methodology, the Three Gorges Group enterprise architecture is designed
by tailoring its methodology to the Three Gorges reality.
Thebusinessarchitecturelooksatprocesses,mainlydescribingtheenterprise’scapa-
bilities,horizontallyacrossphasesandverticallyacrossroles,sortingoutthemainlinesof
theenterprise’scapabilities,andclarifyingtheenterprise’sbusinessstrategy,governance,
organisation and key business processes.
Data architecture looks at sharing, the structure of the organisation’s various logical
and physical data assets and data management resources. In data architecture, there are
three forms of data, scattered called resources, unified called assets, and empowered
called capital. Building an enterprise data architecture is to lead data assets to form data
capital through data architecture.
Application architecture looks at integration, a blueprint of the individual applica-
tionsbeingdeployed,theinteractionsbetweenthesystems,andtherelationshipbetween
them and the organisation’s core business processes. Three Gorges Group is mainly a
traditional enterprise, and its business is mainly steady-state business, so it adopts a bus
approach to application integration.
The technical architecture looks at the platform, which is the logical software and
hardware capabilities necessary to support the deployment of business, data and appli-
cation services. It includes IT infrastructure, middleware, network, communication,
deployment processing and some standards.
Based on the above comprehensive analysis, an example of the value stream of
Three Gorges Group’s main business--Power Generation and Operation is shown in the
following Fig. 2.

--- PAGE 7 ---
584 Q. Xiao et al.
Fig. 2. The value stream of CTG’s Power Generation and Operation
5 Discussion
In the future, with the in-depth integration of digital technology and energy systems,
clean energy enterprises will accelerate their evolution in the direction of ‘intelligent
collaboration + ecological operation’.
CTGandotherleadingenterprisesneedtorelyontheFDR-EAtobuildanewenergy
systemthatis‘data-connected,technologicallyagile,andmulti-energy-complementary’.
1. Data-driven intelligent decision-making across the entire domain
With the help of AIoT, digital twin and other technologies, real-time data collec-
tion and dynamic optimisation of all elements of wind, light, water and storage can be
achieved,formingaclosed-loopmanagementof‘perception-prediction-regulation’,and
increasing the rate of clean energy consumption.
2. Cross-industry ecological synergy
Throughblockchain,webuildagreenpowertradingplatform,connectpowergenera-
tion, power grid, and user side data, promote the integrated market operation of ‘source-
network-load-storage’, and build a carbon-neutral ecosystem in conjunction with car
enterprises and parks.
3. Adaptive technology architecture
Adopting micro-service and cloud native technology stack, dynamically integrat-
ing innovative applications such as AIGC (generative scheduling strategy) and edge
computing (station-level autonomy), so that the system has the ability to continuously
evolve.

--- PAGE 8 ---
A Study on Digital Governance Framework Based on Enterprise Architecture 585
4. Digital twin empowers low-carbon operation
In the Yangtze River Basin and other key areas, a ‘physical power station - digital
mirror’twinningsystemisbeingbuilttooptimisereservoirscheduling,equipmentmain-
tenance and other decision-making through simulation and deduction to reduce carbon
emissions.
Underthistrend,EnterpriseArchitecture(EA)willbecomethecorehubof‘strategy-
technology-ecology’ synergy, promoting the energy system from single-point digitisa-
tion to a new stage of ‘chain intelligence and value ecology’, and ultimately realising
high-quality development under the ‘dual-carbon’ goal.
6 Conclusion
This study demonstrates that the Four-Dimensional Rule EA (FDR-EA) provides a
comprehensive and structured approach for clean energy enterprises to navigate digital
transformation in the digital economy era.
This study demonstrates that the Four-Dimensional Rule System EA (FDR-EA)
provides a comprehensive and structured approach for clean energy enterprises to navi-
gate digital transformation in the digital economy era. By integrating strategy decoding,
process reconstruction, data governance, and technology adaptation within the TOGAF
framework, FDR-EA ensures alignment between strategic vision and operational exe-
cution. The case study of China Three Gorges Group validates the framework’s effec-
tiveness in optimizing value streams, enhancing decision-making, and driving digital-
business integration. Moreover, the discussion on emerging technologies highlights the
potential of AI, IoT, and big data analytics to further enhance operational efficiency and
innovation under the FDR-EA model.
The findings underscore that FDR-EA not only supports current digital transforma-
tion initiatives but also provides a scalable foundation for future technological advance-
ments. For clean energy enterprises, adopting this framework can facilitate a more agile,
data-driven, and sustainable transition. Future research could explore sector-specific
adaptations of FDR-EA and its long-term impacts on organizational performance in the
evolving digital economy.
References
1. Alghamdi, H.: Assessing the impact of enterprise architecture on digital transformation suc-
cess:aglobalperspective.Sustainability16(20),8865(2024).https://doi.org/10.3390/su1620
8865
2. Alrub, Y.A., Sánchez-Cañizares, S.M.: Dynamic capabilities and digital transformation:
toward strategic planning in the digital age—evidence from palestine. Adm. Sci. 15(1), 21
(2025). https://doi.org/10.3390/admsci15010021
3. Bindeeba, D.S., Tukamushaba, E.K., Bakashaba, R.: Digital transformation and its multidi-
mensionalimpactonsustainablebusinessperformance:evidencefromameta-analyticreview.
Futur. Bus. J. 11, 90 (2025). https://doi.org/10.1186/s43093-025-00511-z
4. Bonomi, F., Milito, R., Zhu, J., Addepalli, S.: Fog computing and its role in the Internet
of Things. In: Proceedings of the First Edition of the MCC Workshop on Mobile Cloud
Computing, pp. 13–16 (2012)

--- PAGE 9 ---
586 Q. Xiao et al.
5. China Academy of Information and Communications Technology. White Paper on the Inte-
grated Development of BigData and RealEconomy. Beijing:China Academy ofInformation
and Communications Technology (2019)
6. Davenport,T.H.,Ronanki,R.:Artificialintelligencefortherealworld.Harv.Bus.Rev.96(1),
108–116 (2018)
7. DoD Architecture Framework Working Group. DoD Architecture Framework (v. 2.02) US
DoD. Available at DODAF - DOD Architecture Framework Version 2.02 - DOD Deputy
Chief Information Officer (defense.gov) (2010)
8. Gampfer, F., Jürgens, A., Müller, M., Buchkremer, R.: Past, current and future trends in
enterprise architecture—a view beyond the horizon. Comput. Ind. 100, 70–84 (2018). https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.compind.2018.03.006
9. Huang, L.: Enterprise digital transformation and management: research framework and
prospects. J. Manage. Sci. China 24(8) (2021)
10. ISO/IEC. Systems and software engineering-architecture description (2011)
11. Zachman, J.A.: A framework for information systems architecture. IBM Syst. J. 26(3), 276–
292 (1987) https://doi.org/10.1147/sj.263.0276
12. Korhonen, J.J., Poutanen, J.: Tripartite approach to enterprise architecture. J. Enterp. Archit.
9, 28–38 (2013)
13. Lapalme, J.: Three schools of thought on enterprise architecture. IT Prof. 14, 37–43 (2012).
https://doi.org/10.1109/MITP.2011.109
14. McCabe, T.: Fundamentals of Enterprise Architecture, O’Reilly Media, Inc. (2024)
15. Kane,G.C.,Palmer,D.,Phillips,A.N.,Kiron,D.,Buckley,N.:Strategy,nottechnology,drives
digital transformation. MIT Sloan Manag. Rev. 14(1), 1–25 (2015)
16. Ross, J.W., Weill, P., Robertson, D.C.: Enterprise Architecture as Strategy: Creating a
Foundation for Business Execution. Harvard Business Review Press (2006)
17. Fuentes-Quijada, G., Ruiz-González, F., Caro, A.: Enterprise architecture and IT governance
to support the bizdevops approach: a systematic mapping study. Inf. Syst. Front. (2024).
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10796-024-10473-2
18. Skare,M.,delasMercedesdeObesso,M.,Ribeiro-Navarrete,S.:Digitaltransformationand
European small and medium enterprises (SMEs): a comparative study using digital economy
and society index data. Int. J. Inf. Manage. 68, 102594 (2023). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijinfo
mgt.2022.102594
19. Clark,T.,Barn,B.S.,Oussena,S.:Amethodforenterprisearchitecturealignment.In:Practice-
Driven Research on Enterprise Transformation, Springer, pp. 48–76 (2012)
20. The Open Group. TOGAF Version 9.2 (2018)
21. Vial, G.: Understanding digital transformation: a review and a research agenda. J. Strat. Inf.
Syst. 28(2), 118–144 (2019)

--- PAGE 10 ---
A Study on Digital Governance Framework Based on Enterprise Architecture 587
Open Access This chapter is licensed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution-
NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/
by-nc-nd/4.0/), which permits any noncommercial use, sharing, distribution and reproduction in
any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the
source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license and indicate if you modified the licensed
material. You do not have permission under this license to share adapted material derived from
this chapter or parts of it.
The images or other third party material in this chapter are included in the chapter’s Creative
Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not
included in the chapter’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by
statutoryregulation orexceeds the permitted use,youwill need toobtain permissiondirectly from
the copyright holder.