--- PAGE 1 ---
Academic Editor: Mitsuru Kodama
Received: 19 August 2025
Revised: 28 November 2025
Accepted: 2 December 2025
Published: 9 December 2025
Citation: Yan, M.-R.; Chou, C.-H.;
Chi,H.-L. Strategic Architectureof
Sustainable System Developmentfor
ESGTransformation in Large Multi-
PurposeSports Venues. Systems2025,
13,1108. https://doi.org/10.3390/
systems13121108
Copyright: © 2025 by the authors.
LicenseeMDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
Thisarticle is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license
(https://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/4.0/).
Article
Strategic Architecture of Sustainable System Development for
ESG Transformation in Large Multi-Purpose Sports Venues
Min-Ren Yan 1,† , Chien-Heng Chou 2,† and Hui-Lan Chi 2,*,†
1 College of Education, National Chengchi University, No. 64, Sec. 2, Zhinan Rd., Taipei 11605, Taiwan;
aaronyan@nccu.edu.tw
2 Department of International Business Administration, Chinese Culture University, No. 55, Huagang Road,
Yangmingshan, Taipei 11114, Taiwan; chouchdr@ulive.pccu.edu.tw
* Correspondence: lannychi@gmail.com
† These authors contributed equally to this work.
Abstract
This paper proposes a strategic architecture of sustainable system development (SSD) for
ESG enterprise transformation, demonstrating its application through a real-world case
study on large multi-purpose sports venues (LMPSVs). The research integrates systems
thinking, computer-aided dynamic business modeling and digital technologies to support
ESG enterprise transformation strategies and business operations. An ESGI (environmental,
social, governance, and innovation) framework is proposed to demonstrate the transfor-
mation process through empirical data and scenario analysis. Furthermore, this study
develops an integrated strategic enterprise architecture (ISEA) to integrate strategic plan-
ning with enterprise execution, wherein strategic architecture (SA) takes precedence over
enterprise architecture (EA). The SSD-driven SA provides directional strategic guidance
integrated with EA. This study prioritizes the construction of SA required for enterprise
ESG transformation, serving as a research blueprint for future construction of EA at the
technical implementation level. The findings indicate that LMPSVs must adopt integrated
transformation strategies, strengthen digital capabilities, and embed ESGI as a core concept
to sustain a competitive advantage in volatile environments. The framework offers a sys-
tematic and dynamic approach emphasizing inclusive growth, operational resilience, value
creation, and sustainable development goals. The study’s originality lies in the SSD-based
ESGI framework, which translates conceptual ideas into advanced operational models for
scientific management and performance improvement. By integrating cross-disciplinary
knowledge, the framework provides a systematic, dynamic, and multi-value-oriented
analytical tool that bridges the gap in the existing literature, offering significant value for
both theoretical development and practical application.
Keywords: ESG; sustainable system development (SSD); strategic architecture; digital
transformation; large multi-purpose sports venues (LMPSVs); strategic architecture (SA);
enterprise architecture (EA); business innovation
1. Introduction
Against the backdrop of increasing environmental challenges and social responsibility
requirements worldwide, LMPSVs are not only centers of athletic competition and enter-
tainment but are also frontline locations for sustainable practices. With the growing global
concern over climate change, resource utilization and social responsibility, there is an urgent
need for LMPSVs to transform their operations to meet the new sustainability requirements.
Systems 2025, 13, 1108 https://doi.org/10.3390/systems13121108

--- PAGE 2 ---
Systems 2025, 13, 1108 2 of 31
1.1. Research Motivation
The UN 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development states that LMPSVs must undergo
comprehensive transformation and systematic innovation in environmental, social and eco-
nomic aspects to achieve sustainable development goals [1]. This requires top-down policy
guidanceandbottom-upinstitutionalinnovationtoachieveawin-winsituationofeconomic
growth, social inclusion and environmental friendliness through multi-stakeholder collab-
oration. LMPSVs increasingly demonstrate environmental sustainability through green
buildings, waste reduction and alternative transportation, serving as educational leaders
and extending beyond service provision to broader sustainability responsibility [2]. Despite
global consensus on sustainable development, there is limited systematic exploration of
how to achieve this goal in LMPSVs. While existing literature focuses on sustainable build-
ing design or energy efficiency, a knowledge gap exists in integrating ESGI strategies into
a comprehensive transformation framework. This gap limits decision-making efficiency
and effectiveness for LMPSV managers and policymakers facing sustainability challenges.
Existing sports venue sustainability studies focus on individual dimensions such as envi-
ronmental or social impacts, lacking holistic perspectives on systemic transformation [3].
Understanding sports organizations’ motivations for sustainability initiatives is critical for
driving meaningful industry transformation [4].
United Nations has promoted the principles of sustainable development and sustain-
able development goals (SDGs) that drive large-scale educational innovations and business
transformation in the global communities and economic system. As the world transitions
to a more sustainable system, systems thinking and frontier competencies for sustainable
development have been recognized by UN and global leaders. It is important to facilitate
the transformation of LMPSVs towards a more sustainable business model through a
systems approach, implementing an ESGI business transformation strategy based on the
framework of Sustainable System Development (SSD).
1.2. Research Objectives
Exploring the ESG business transformation for LMPSVs from the perspectives of sus-
tainable system development, this study confronts a highly complex and multi-dimensional
problem domain. This complexity arises from several sources, including the fact that
LMPSVs require the integration and implementation of cross-disciplinary knowledge and
skills related to ESG, as well as the need to continually adapt and update the sustainability
strategy in response to dynamic changes in the external environment, such as social, eco-
nomic, environmental, and technological shifts. Furthermore, the implementation of the
ESG transformation strategy involves a wide range of organizational change management,
including management concepts, organizational structure, operational processes, and cor-
porate culture. Therefore, the management of implementing these changes is a complex
process in itself.
This study explores the application potential and practice path of SSD in LMPSVs.
It constructs a strategic framework for ESG enterprise transformation and provides a
systematic decision-making reference for sustainable development. It also reveals the
opportunities, challenges and strategies for sustainable transformation, expanding new
paradigms and innovative ideas for LMPSV management. Thus, it enriches academic
exploration in the field of sustainability.
2. SSD and ESGI Enterprise Transformation
The rise of global sustainability concerns has necessitated a transformation in LMPSV
operations and management. Historically focused on commercial efficiency and audience
experience, LMPSVs now face pressure to integrate environmental protection, social re-

--- PAGE 3 ---
Systems 2025, 13, 1108 3 of 31
sponsibility and governance alongside economic efficiency in response to ESG principles
and SDGs. This study adopts SSD as its theoretical foundation, which emphasizes bal-
anced development of environment, society and economic systems through innovation
as a dynamic and adaptive approach supporting organizational learning and sustainable
development [5]. As important public facilities hosting sporting, cultural and entertainment
activities, LMPSVs must meet stakeholder expectations for continuous improvement. Inte-
grating SSD and ESGI concepts enables comprehensive understanding of environmental
protection, social responsibility, governance structures and innovative practices, ensuring
long-term sustainability and positive community impacts. The SSD approach integrates
cross-disciplinary knowledge and engages multiple stakeholders, providing systematic
solutions that help organizations effectively address sustainability challenges and achieve
long-term environmental, social and economic benefits aligned with SDGs.
2.1. From Systems Thinking to Sustainable System Development
Systems thinking is a holistic approach that focuses on the interconnectedness of
elements, in contrast to linear causality [6]. Systems thinking emphasizes understanding
interconnections and dynamic feedback among system elements, enabling enterprises to
grasp transformation complexity and formulate effective strategies [7]. Systems thinking al-
lows us to identify feedback loops and delays in a system, which is critical to understanding
sustainability challenges [8]. Systems thinking enables understanding how environmen-
tal, social and economic factors interact and affect sustainable performance and strategy
development of sports venues [9].
System dynamics (SD) is a computer-based simulation methodology for understand-
ing and predicting the behavior of complex systems, particular in the design and evaluation
of sustainability strategies. SD can be used to emphasize its value in developing and evalu-
ating sustainability strategies [10]. In the context of sports stadiums, SD can help managers
understand how different decisions affect the environmental and social performance of the
stadium and predict the long-term effects of these decisions.
Sustainable System Development (SSD) is an emerging paradigm linking systems
thinking with practical sustainable development solutions. It provides analytical and plan-
ning tools for LMPSVs’ ESG transformation, enabling organizations to identify challenges,
design strategies, and model impacts for informed decision-making toward sustainability.
SSD guides LMPSVs through green building concepts and energy-efficient technologies
to enhance environmental performance and support sustainable development [11]. Im-
plementing energy conservation management to optimize the energy systems of venues
and reduce operating costs [12]. Improving the service functions of venues increases the
social value of venues and meets diverse social needs [13]. The social inclusiveness of
venues is enhanced through public participation mechanisms that involve community resi-
dents in the planning, design, and management decisions of the venues [14]. By regularly
evaluating the usage and satisfaction of the venue, areas for improvement are identified
and timely adjustments are made [15]. Comprehensive assessment frameworks such as
LEED or BREEAM evaluate and certify venues’ sustainable performance [16]. Through
the application of SSD, LMPSVs can achieve long-term sustainable development, provide
quality services and create economic value while considering social responsibility and
environmental protection for cities and communities.
2.2. SSD-Based ESGI Goals and Scope
SSD provides a comprehensive framework for integrating ESGI dimensions to achieve
sustainable development. SDGs are widely recognized a common language that unites
a global commitment to shifting trajectory in social, economic, and environmental devel-

--- PAGE 4 ---
Systems 2025, 13, 1108 4 of 31
opment issues. Although not explicitly mentioned in the SDGs or their related targets,
sport has been widely accepted and promoted as a means of enabling social change and a
mechanism for strategically mapping and measuring commitments to sustainability [17].
Sport facilities have a major environmental impact in addition to a strong public profile
and social responsibility [18]. These large facilities consume significant resources like
energy, water, and materials over their life cycles, and also require transport, leading to
substantial environmental, social, and economic impacts. Sustainability has become a core
focus in the management of sports facilities, encompassing a wide range of aspects such
as energy efficiency, water management, solid waste reduction and social responsibility.
These studies highlight the importance of implementing green building standards and
operational practices to mitigate the environmental impacts of LMPSVs.
ESG can be understood as a set of principles that investors hoping to demonstrate
social responsibility with right investment for a company’s operations [19]. The consensus-
level strategic priorities for sustainable development from the perspective of decision-
makers responsible for governing international sport were explored, and they were found
to cluster within the framework for strategic sustainable development [20]. The highest
ranked item was normative change, in which sustainability is prioritized throughout all
organizational strategies and actions. Moreover, planned efforts that are part of a long-term
strategy and embedding sustainability requirements at the bidding phase of sport events
were considered with high priority. The aforementioned ideas supported the importance
on setting ESGI goals and scope for enterprise transformation.
2.3. Strategic Architecture and Enterprise Architecture for Transformation
Strategic architecture (SA) is a roadmap that identifies which core competencies need
to be built for the future [21], representing the intangible intellectual, philosophical, and nor-
mative DNA that guides and provides consistency to all important business decisions [22].
SA can be viewed as a blueprint for the future that identifies which core competencies
need to be established, and can also represent the intangible intelligence, philosophy, and
even normative frameworks that support nearly all critical business decisions [21,22]. By
viewing modeling techniques and simulation as fundamental elements supporting manage-
ment decision-making and operations research, Management Flight Simulators (MFSs) are
defined as simulations of complex operational and strategic issues in enterprises and other
organizations [23]. Simulation-based Strategic Decision Support Systems (SSDSS) can serve
as MFSs to support the simulation of complex operational and strategic issues in enterprises
and other organizations [24,25]. To improve IT-enabled operations management, research
has proposed a Knowledge-based Management Decision Support System (KMDSS) [26]
that supports analyzing changesin businessperformance overtime, as wellas analyzingthe
impact of strategic resource management decisions on organizational dynamic capabilities
from a systems perspective. The visualization of these models can be viewed as learning
tools and knowledge creation mechanisms, allowing managers to experiment with diverse
strategies and learn from simulated decisions in well-designed learning environments. As
an enterprise-wide high-level blueprint for deploying new functionalities, acquiring new
capabilities or migrating existing capabilities, and reconfiguring customer interfaces, strate-
gic architecture’s core characteristics represent the fundamental logic of how organizations
create sustained value, thereby forming the foundation of organizational competitiveness.
Enterprise architecture (EA) is the fundamental organizational structure of a system,
embodied in its components, the relationships between components and with the envi-
ronment, and the principles governing its design and evolution [27]. EA provides various
perspectives from technical and business viewpoints, adopts a disciplined approach to
manage enterprise IT and business systems, defines applicable selection constraints, and

--- PAGE 5 ---
Systems 2025, 13, 1108 5 of 31
its core components include frameworks, methodologies, and tools. TOGAF (The Open
Group Architecture Framework) is the primary framework and standard for enterprise
architecture, providing a standardized methodology for practicing enterprise architecture.
Through the systematic Architecture Development Method (ADM), it “organizes the devel-
opment process, reduces errors, maintains timelines, and controls budgets,” enabling IT
and business units to coordinate and produce high-quality results [28]. TOGAF provides
a consistent view of architectural artifacts for all stakeholders within the organization,
with the purpose of optimizing the fragmented legacy of processes across the entire enter-
prise, transforming them into an integrated environment that is responsive to change and
supports the delivery of business strategy [29].
The Integrated Strategic Enterprise Architecture (ISEA) framework (Figure 1) adopts a
three-layer structure that integrates strategic planning and enterprise execution. The top
layer, Strategic Architecture (SA), encompasses four strategic dimensions: customer, prod-
ucts, staff, and capacity. The middle layer, Enterprise Architecture (EA), includes TOGAF
standard domains such as business, information, application, and technology. The SA layer
and EA layer are tightly connected through a bidirectional cycle: strategic architecture pro-
vides “strategy guidance” downward to ensure EA development aligns with organizational
strategic objectives, while enterprise architecture feeds back “capability feedback” upward,
conveying practical considerations such as technical feasibility, execution capability, and
resource constraints to the strategy layer. This dynamic synergy mechanism breaks the
traditional unidirectional planning model, forming a continuously optimized closed-loop
system that ultimately integrates at the bottom layer into a complete ISEA framework,
achieving alignment between strategic intent and technical practice. This model is particu-
larly suitable for large-scale multi-purpose sports venues promoting ESGI transformation,
where both clear sustainable development strategic direction and consideration of existing
IT systems, operational capabilities, and resource allocation realities are needed. Through
the ISEA framework, these diverse requirements can be systematically integrated.
Figure 1. The Integrated Strategic Enterprise Architecture (ISEA) framework.
Strategic Architecture (SA), like a brain, provides directional guidance for the entire
enterprise architecture, while EA supports SA. SA defines organizational vision and objec-
tives, guiding enterprise architecture downward, where business architecture transforms
strategic intent into concrete business directions and further guides the development of data
architecture, application architecture, and technology architecture. This relationship ex-
hibits dynamic bidirectional interaction characteristics, with strategic architecture guiding
the development of each architectural layer top-down while obtaining feedback from the

--- PAGE 6 ---
Systems 2025, 13, 1108 6 of 31
execution level to adjust strategic direction. If an organization rashly constructs enterprise
architecture before clearly defining customer value propositions, product-service portfolios,
human resource strategies, and operational capacity objectives, it will face the serious
“technology-driven” trap, resulting in IT system, application, and technology infrastructure
investments lacking business alignment, ultimately evolving into resource waste of tech-
nology for technology’s sake. SA determines fundamental issues such as organizational
positioning, target customer segments, and core competencies, and these key elements
directly guide the construction priorities of EA. Taking LMPSVs as an example, if the
strategic positioning is regional premier concert venue, the enterprise architecture needs to
prioritize building robust ticketing systems, VIP customer management, and large event
coordination capabilities; if positioned as a community multi-purpose activity center, it
needs to develop flexible space reservation systems, community membership management,
and diversified fee mechanisms. Constructing EA before strategy is clarified will lead to
misallocated investments and the development of systems that do not meet actual needs.
The failure of sustainability transformation in large organizations often stems not from
a lack of technical capabilities or IT systems, but from the absence of systemic thinking at
the strategic level, leading to ESG objectives being decoupled from core business operations
and sustainability initiatives becoming superficial efforts. Therefore, this research adopts
SSD as the theoretical framework, prioritizing the construction of the strategic architecture
layer required for enterprise ESGI transformation, to serve as a research blueprint for future
construction of enterprise architecture at the technical implementation level.
Strategic enterprise transformation is a sustainable and feedback process that re-
quires systematic changes in strategy, structure, processes, and people to adapt to the
ever-evolving internal and external environment [30]. In this paper, we examine different
strategies and approaches proposed in existing studies that aim to guide the effective
implementation of SSD-based ESGI transformation in LMPSVs. A decision-making model
is proposed to facilitate the construction of a field of action for the transformation of enter-
prises towards sustainable development, enabling the determinations of how to implement
sustainable actions based on value management [31]. An effective framework for strategic
enterprise transformation is the key to achieving the goal of sustainable development.
This not only requires clear strategic planning, but also emphasizes cross-departmental
cooperation, innovative thinking, and flexibility to external changes. In addition, a success-
ful transformation strategy should include staff training and development, as well as an
effective monitoring and evaluation mechanism to ensure the realization of sustainable
development objectives.
2.4. Life Cycle Sustainability Assessment (LCSA)
Life cycle sustainability assessment (LCSA) is a methodology for evaluating the envi-
ronmental impacts of a product or service across its entire life cycle, encompassing stages
from raw material acquisition to production, manufacturing, use and final disposal [32].
Current life cycle environmental assessments typically focus on maintenance, repair,
replacement and operational energy consumption during use, but often overlook the
impacts of future refurbishments. Life cycle assessment should be used more frequently as
a decision-making tool to guide the design of a sustainable transformation [33]. This study
synthesizes state-of-the-art stadium design and construction methods and initiatives that
can be applied to improve environmental sustainability outcomes. Energy and materials
are the most widely focused environmental sustainability categories in stadium design
and construction [34]. The building stakeholders cannot easily quantify the environmental
impacts of buildings as they accrue during construction. The goal of this work is to
demonstrate a method to measure and manage the cradle-to-gate life cycle environmental

--- PAGE 7 ---
Systems 2025, 13, 1108 7 of 31
impacts by linking environmental targets with modern construction management methods,
enabling buildings to meet sustainable target values (STV) [35]. The construction and
operation of large stadiums is an important factor affecting the sustainable development of
cities. The stadium sustainability assessment in the pre-design stage directly affects the
decision-making of architectural design parameters [36].
By analyzing the existing literature in detail, we can see that the application of ESGI prin-
ciples throughout a business’s life cycle is crucial for achieving sustainable development goals.
2.5. CRISP-DM Life Cycle Assessment
Cross-industry Standard Process for Data Mining (CRISP-DM) provides a structured
approach to planning, implementing, and evaluating data mining projects. It covers
the phases of business understanding, data understanding, data preparation, modeling,
evaluation, and deployment [37]. CRISP-DM is a widely accepted process model for data
mining and knowledge discovery, aiming to offer an industry-agnostic approach to guide
data analytics projects.
In recent years, sports events and sports teams have adopted the Big Data architecture
CRISP-DM technology tool to facilitate their business activities, aiming for greater prof-
itability and better understanding of their customers’ needs [38]. With the development
of the stadium, combined with modern artificial intelligence technology to establish a
more scientific and efficient information management system is very practical significance.
Based on the decision tree algorithm in artificial intelligence technology, the power sys-
tem and information management system and the hardware system of the stadium were
upgraded [39].
CRISP-DM provides a structured framework that helps organizations systematically
apply data analytics to support their ESGI transformation strategies. By following each
step of the process—from business understanding to deployment—organizations can more
effectively identify and implement sustainability strategies and actions. This approach not
only improves environmental and social performance but also supports the achievement of
long-term business success and competitive advantage.
2.6. Dynamic Strategic Management and Business Innovation
Corporate innovation management requires a dynamic and integrated strategic frame-
work that considers technological, market, and organizational factors to continuously
optimize innovation processes and outcomes [40]. SSD-based business innovation and dy-
namic management strategies aim to achieve sustainable development goals by responding
to rapidly changing environmental and social challenges through adaptive management
and continuous improvement.
Drawing on engineering control theory and the modern theory of nonlinear dynamical
systems, SD often involves developing formal models and management flight simula-
tors to capture complex dynamics and create an environment for learning and policy
design [14]. The dynamic capabilities architecture analyzes the sources and methods of
wealth creation and capture by private enterprise firms operating in environments of rapid
technological change.
2.7. ESGI Enterprise Transformation Framework
In the context of SSD, enterprises need to reshape their organizational structures, estab-
lish cross-departmental collaboration mechanisms, and promote integration and synergy
among ESGI [5,41]. ESGI architecture involves integrating these principles into the organi-
zational architecture and operations of a business to promote sustainable development and
long-term value creation.

--- PAGE 8 ---
Systems 2025, 13, 1108 8 of 31
ESGI enterprise transformation framework highlights the importance of integrating
environmental, social, governance and innovation principles to achieve sustainable devel-
opment. By strengthening environmental and social responsibility, implementing good
governance practices, promoting innovation, fostering ESGI-supportive organizational
culture and leadership, and enhancing cross-sectoral collaboration and stakeholder en-
gagement, businesses can effectively address social and environmental challenges while
promoting economic growth.
2.8. Digital Business Operations and Decision-Making Information Flow System
Digital business operations and decision-making information flow are integral parts
of an organization’s transformation strategy, enabling it to remain competitive in a rapidly
changing market environment. Through the effective use of digital technology, enterprises
can not only optimize their internal operations, but also enhance customer experience,
thereby achieving sustainable growth and development.
With the in-depth application of digital transformation, enterprises need to establish
efficient digital business operations and decision support systems, integrate internal and
external information flows, and achieve real-time monitoring and optimization [42]. Digital
transformation has become a key strategy for enterprises to improve efficiency and enhance
competitiveness. Digitalization has not only changed the way products and services are
delivered but also reshaped the interaction mode and value creation process between enter-
prises and their customers. By integrating advanced digital technologies such as big data,
cloud computing, Internet of Things (IoT) and artificial intelligence (AI), enterprises can
achieve more efficient operation management and more accurate decision support systems.
Digital transformation systems generate a substantial volume of data, creating oppor-
tunities for innovation, particularly those driven by artificial intelligence [43]. This work
emphasizes the key pillars essential for fostering AI-powered innovation, including moni-
toring performance measurement to leverage current capabilities, continuous learning and
innovation, data analytics and insights, predictive analytics, and innovative product devel-
opment. Decision support system (DSS) can efficiently support companies and enterprises
in managing promotional and marketing campaigns across multiple social media channels.
DSS continuously monitors multiple social channels. The DSS continuously monitors these
channels by collecting social media users’ comments on promotions, products, and services.
By analyzing this data, the DSS estimates the reputation of brands associated with specific
companies and provides feedback on digital marketing campaigns [44].
3. Research Design
This study utilized a mixed-methods research design, incorporating case study with
systems analysis. First, the theoretical basis and key factors of ESGI enterprise transforma-
tion were identified through a literature review. This was followed by expert interviews and
empirical investigations to gather practical experiences and perspectives from experienced
LMPSVs managers and stakeholders.
This study focuses on the SSD application of the ESGI enterprise transformation for
LMPSVs to achieve sustainable operations and strategic management of LMPSVs. The
rationale for adopting qualitative research methodology is that the sustainable transfor-
mation of venues is a complex and systemic issue involving multiple dimensions, such as
environment, society, governance, and innovation. This complexity requires an in-depth
understanding of the interactions and dynamic evolutionary patterns among different
elements, which qualitative research can effectively address [45]. Differences in the institu-
tional environment, resource conditions, interest patterns and other contextual factors of
different venues affect the choice of transformation paths and the effectiveness of imple-

--- PAGE 9 ---
Systems 2025, 13, 1108 9 of 31
mentation. Qualitative research contributes to identifying new problems, refining theories,
summarizing new experiences, and developing a deeper understanding of the situational
contexts and behavioral logics involved in transitions [46,47]. There is a relative lack of
domestic and international research on the sustainable transformation of venues; in partic-
ular, the practical exploration of introducing SSD and ESGI frameworks into the field of
LMPSVs is rare.
3.1. Research Methods
This study adopts a qualitative research methodology, utilizing tools such as in-depth
interviews, participant observation, document analysis and thorough exploration of the
sustainable transformation practices of ESGI framework in LMPSVs (Table 1).
Table 1. Focus contents and main results of the qualitative research.
Research Methods Focus Contents Main Results
In-depth interviews
Interviews with venue managers, staff and
stakeholders to understand their views,
experiences and suggestions on the
sustainable transformation of venues.
Identify the key drivers, challenges and
opportunities in LMPSV transformation process, as
well as the expectations and needs of different
stakeholders.
Participant observations
The researcher is personally involved in the
day-to-day operations and management
activities of the venue, observing the
organizational culture, workflow and
decision-making process.
An in-depth understanding of how LMPSVs operate,
their internal dynamics and potential barriers to
transformation provides real-world contextual
insights for the construction of the framework.
Project reports
Analyze the venue’s existing sustainability
plan and project reports to assess their fitness
with ESGI goals and effectiveness of
implementation.
Identify existing practices and room for
improvement in the environmental, social,
governance and innovation aspects of LMPSVs to
inform the design of the elements of the framework.
Meeting notes
Analyze the minutes of venue management
and staff meetings to capture their
discussions and decision-making processes
on transformation issues.
Understand the LMPSVs’ internal perceptions,
attitudes, and decision-making logic towards
transformation, and identify potential resistance and
facilitators.
Business operation data
To collect and analyze the financial,
patronage, energy consumption and other
business operation data of the venues to
assess their sustainable performance and
transformation needs.
Identify bottlenecks and room for optimization in
the sustainable development of LMPSV operations,
providing a quantitative basis for the design of the
elements of the framework and performance
evaluation.
User feedback documents
Analyze feedback and satisfaction survey
data from venue users to understand their
evaluations and expectations of the venue’s
sustainable practices.
Identify the sustainability performance and needs of
LMPSVs in the eyes of the users and provide a
user-centered perspective for the design of the
elements of the framework.
For the in-depth interviews, semi-structured interviews were conducted with stake-
holders, such as venue managers, staff, and service objects, to gain a deeper understanding
of their subjective feelings and meaning construction on the causes, processes, and effects
of transformation, and to uncover the key events and typical cases of transformation [48].
In-depth interviews are valuable for obtaining the subjective feelings, cognitive logic and
behavioral motives of the research object through face-to-face communication. Through
participant observations, the researcher delved deeply into the transformation practice of
LMPSVs, closely observing the key aspects of formulating, implementing, and evaluating
the transformation strategies. This was achieved through site visits, observing meetings,
and participating in activities, allowing the capture of critical details of the transformation
process [49]. Additionally, the research team immersed themselves in the venues’ operation
and management practices by conducting site visits, field surveys, participating in major

--- PAGE 10 ---
Systems 2025, 13, 1108 10 of 31
events, routine meetings, and training exercises, meticulously observing and recording
their findings. The research also involved a comprehensive document analysis, where
various textual data such as strategic plans, annual reports, meeting minutes, and news
reports were collected and analyzed. This enabled the uncovering of the institutional logic,
discourse system, and power relations underlying the venues’ transformation [50].
By integrating the above qualitative research tools, this study comprehensively collects
and analyzes first-hand information on the sustainable transformation of LMPSVs from
the perspectives of managers, employees, and users. These data provide rich and in-depth
insights into the influencing factors and mechanisms of the sustainable transformation of
venues, laying a solid foundation for the construction of the ESGI framework, and ensuring
the comprehensiveness, relevance, and operability of the cases.
3.2. Case Selection
This paper presents a case study of the characteristics of BOT public works construc-
tion. The methodology aligns with the scientific study of the management of LMPSVs.
Venue cases and research participants can provide rich information, such as benchmark
venues leading transformation practices and insights from key stakeholders, to obtain high
quality qualitative data [51].
KaohsiungDomeisselectedforthecasestudy, whichisthefirstmodernizedintegrated
stadium in Kaohsiung City built under the Dome BOT project in Taiwan. Kaohsiung Dome
is a representative example of the Kaohsiung City Government’s success in utilizing the
Public-Private Partnerships (PPP) model. This model has enabled community participation
in the public construction of LMPSVs. After the completion of the hardware facilities of the
PPP projects, the private sector must inject new business concepts into the management of
the projects. PPP not only reduce the government’s financial and budgetary expenditures,
but also enhances the socio-economic outlook, increases employment opportunities, and
promotes district prosperity. The most important outcome is the public’s ability to enjoy and
utilize well-designed public spaces and facilities, creating a mutually beneficial scenario
for the public sector, private enterprises, and the public, thereby realizing private business
objectives and urban development goals.
Kaohsiung Dome plays a significant role in promoting local economic development
and social engagement through its support of large-scale multi-purpose sports and enter-
tainment. The stadium has not only provided Kaohsiung with numerous jobs opportunities,
but also has fostered the integration of the local sports, cultural and tourism industries.
By hosting international sporting events and cultural activities, the stadium enhances
Kaohsiung City’s international image and competitiveness, and serves as an important
bridge connecting the local community to the international community.
The motivation for investigating Kaohsiung Dome stems from its potential and chal-
lenges in realizing sustainable development. Through an in-depth study of the potential
and challenges that Kaohsiung Dome faces in realizing sustainable development, this
study aims to provide illustrative insights and strategies that can serve as references for
the sustainable development and transformation of other sports stadiums and similar
public facilities.
3.3. Research Framework
As shown in Figure 2, the strategic framework of ESGI enterprise transforma-
tion for LMPSVs is a comprehensive system designed to guide the stadiums towards
sustainable development.

--- PAGE 11 ---
Systems 2025, 13, 1108 11 of 31
Figure 2. Strategic framework of SSD-based ESGI enterprise transformation for LMPSVs.
The following analysis demonstrates the relationship between the key factors, as well
as the steps and processes involved in the implementation of the entire framework:
I. Establishing SSD-based ESGI goals and scope
The implementation of the framework begins by identifying the long-term goals and
scope of the transformation. At this stage, the environmental impacts, social responsibility,
governance structure and innovation capacity of the sports venues must be considered
collectively to establish measurable and specific ESGI targets.
II. Constructing strategic architecture for ESGI enterprise transformation
To design a strategic architecture based on the identified objectives and scope. This
stage requires cross-departmental collaboration and integration of resources to ensure a
comprehensive and executable strategy. The strategic architecture should incorporate a
specific action plan, resource allocation, and timeline.
III. Applying ESGI enterprise life cycle sustainability assessment
By examining the organization through ESGI lenses, we can assess the current state
of an organization’s life cycle, including the maturity and effectiveness of its environ-
mental, social, governance and innovation dimensions. This assessment helps identify
the strengths and weaknesses of existing strategies and practices, providing a basis for
strategy refinement.
IV. Applying cross-industry standard process for data mining

--- PAGE 12 ---
Systems 2025, 13, 1108 12 of 31
This framework applies a cross-industry standard process for data mining as a data
acquisition model to evaluate data management and analytical capabilities, support data-
driven decision making, and optimize operations as well as enhance innovation efficiency.
V. Dynamic strategic management and business innovation
Drawing on the SSD principles, we can develop dynamic management strategies
to respond to changes in the external environment and internal operational needs. This
includes strategies to flexibly adjust resource allocation, respond to market changes, and
adopt new technologies.
VI. ESGI enterprise organization architecture
Design and adjust the corporate organizational structure to support the imple-
mentation of the ESGI strategy. This may include establishing a dedicated sustainabil-
ity department, adjusting the allocation of responsibilities, optimizing decision-making
processes, etc.
VII. Application of digital business operations and decision-making information flow system
Optimizing business operations and information flow with digital technology can
improve efficiency and transparency. This includes digitization of operational processes,
establishment of data-driven decision-making mechanisms, and so on.
VIII. Implementation and monitoring of ESGI enterprise transformation
Implementing transformation strategies and continuously evaluating their effective-
ness through monitoring is crucial. The monitoring process should track key performance
indicators (KPIs) and promptly address any identified issues.
IX. Feedback and optimization of ESGI enterprise transformation
Based on monitoring results and external feedback, the transformation strategy is regu-
larly evaluated and optimized. This phase is a continuous feedback process aimed at continu-
ally improving the effectiveness and sustainability outcomes of the transformation strategy.
The factors are interconnected, forming a feedback-driven, iterative process. Each
segment supports and informs the next, while also being influenced by the feedback and
adjustments of the subsequent segments. Through such an integrated and dynamic frame-
work, LMPSVs can effectively transform towards sustainability. The proposed 9-pillar
framework and processes provide a strategic approach for ESGI enterprise transforma-
tion, facilitating the environmental, social, governance, and innovation values of LMPSVs.
This strategic framework offers a comprehensive guide for ESGI assessment and improve-
ment, helping LMPSVs remain competitive and relevant in a modern environment that
increasingly emphasizes sustainability.
4. Implementation of Strategic Architecture
This study systematically analyzes the process, motivation, challenges, and outcomes
of implementing the strategic architecture for ESGI enterprise transformation in LMPSVs.
It first analyzes how the strategic architecture is developed, including the initial stages of
strategic planning, the integration of environment, society, governance, and innovation,
and the process of developing a specific action plan. Furthermore, it describes in detail
the specific steps of the strategic framework from planning to implementation, analyze
the mechanisms used to monitor progress and evaluate the effectiveness of the strategy
implementation. Additionally, the study explores how the strategy and action plan can be
adjusted through periodic review.

--- PAGE 13 ---
Systems 2025, 13, 1108 13 of 31
4.1. Establishing Goals and Scope of ESGI Enterprise Transformation
A series of achievements promote the development and maturity of the environmental,
social, and governance factors. These include the establishment of ESG evaluation systems,
disclosure standards, and index systems. These factors are constantly building a new
pattern of sustainable development [52,53]. ESG factors are traditionally non-financial or
non-material and are usually qualitative in nature, and subject to changing regulations
and policies. The objectives and scope of ESG factors vary by industry sector. When
establishing the goals and scope of LMPSVs under the SSD-based ESGI transformation
strategic architecture, the first step is to define the SSD-based ESGI goals. This involves the
environmental, social, governance and innovation sustainability goals that LMPSVs wishes
to achieve.
The scope of the assessment is defined, identifying all phases of LMPSV operations
to be covered by the life cycle assessment, and providing a comprehensive assessment
of the environmental impacts, socially responsible practices, governance structures and
innovation capabilities of current LMPSVs. Furthermore, based on the results of the
assessment, areas for improvement are identified. Setting specific and measurable targets
for each focus area, developing detailed action plans, and establishing a monitoring system
to track progress and regularly assess the achievement of targets. Based on the monitoring
results and feedback, necessary adjustments and improvements are made to continually
drive the implementation and development of the ESGI strategy. Through these steps,
LMPSVs can make substantial progress on the road to sustainable development, improving
their operational efficiency and market competitiveness, while also contributing to society
and the environment.
4.2. Constructing Strategic Architecture for Enterprise Transformation
Enterprise Core Strategic Architecture (Figure 3) serves as the central brain of an
enterprise. It provides clear directional guidance for the organization’s vision, mission,
and long-term objectives, and establishes a bridging link from strategic planning to actual
execution. These can ensure that top-level strategic intent can be effectively transformed
into concrete business processes, system configurations, and operational activities. Strate-
gic Architecture is not a static document but a dynamic system that forms a continuous
improvement cycle of “strategic planning-execution-evaluation-adjustment” through feed-
back loops. It enables enterprises to adjust strategic direction based on execution results
and environmental changes, thereby enhances decision-making quality and risk manage-
ment capabilities. More importantly, SA must precede the construction of EA because
strategy determines direction. Only under the guidance of a clear SA can the development
of EA be purposeful and targeted, avoiding blind technology investments and system
construction, ultimately creating systematic, dynamic, and multifaceted value for the or-
ganization. In Figure 3, five core resource stocks have identified: business customers,
venue commercial space, venue staff, venue capacity, digital support services, and capital.
The blue lines represent the resource flows driving operation profit, while the red lines
represent the organization’s capital investment as the feedbacks to drive resource flows.
The feedback mechanism is a sustainable system making the organization more capable for
sustainable development.
The innovative business management strategy for LMPSVs, based on SD approach,
applies strategic architecture to venue management across customer management, commer-
cial space rental, marketing, human resources, venue capacity, and digital support services.
This involves identifying key variables such as customer satisfaction, occupancy rates,
marketing effectiveness, employee performance, and service utilization, while analyzing
their interactions and feedback loops for strategic decision-making. Figure 3 demonstrates

--- PAGE 14 ---
Systems 2025, 13, 1108 14 of 31
this enterprise core strategic architecture’s system dynamics structure. The core positive
reinforcement loop increases operational revenue through winning customers, enhances
profits, accumulates capital, and reinvests for growth. Five major strategic investment
dimensions influence venue service quality, which directly affects operational revenue
and customer satisfaction, creating a feedback mechanism linking satisfaction to repeat
attendance and rentals. The cost balance loop provides negative feedback, where invest-
ments increase operating costs and reduce profits, ensuring balance between growth and
financial health, while the capital flow cycle balances investor returns with reinvestment.
The overall architecture presents a dynamic “investment-capacity building-service quality-
revenue-profit-reinvestment” system, with positive loops driving growth and negative
loops providing regulation. This framework reveals how strategic decisions generate
leverage effects through systematic interactions, providing managers an analytical tool for
formulating dynamic strategies to enhance customer experience, optimizing space utiliza-
tion, strengthen marketing, improve efficiency, and expand capacity and digital services.
Figure 3. Enterprise Core Strategic Architecture.
Constructing a dynamic model to represent the interdependencies between the com-
ponents of a system allows for a more complete understanding of the past and better
prediction of the future. Management of the enterprise architecture has become increas-
ingly recognized as a crucial part of both business and IT management [54]. A significant
number of organizations continually face difficulties in putting strategy into practice and
suffer from a lack of structure and transparency in corporate Strategic Management. In-
novation waves force organizational transformation, making current business models
potentially irrelevant and unprepared. Business architecture practice significantly increases
transformation success by aligning needs, approaches and internal context [55]. Enterprise
architecture represents the strategic application of capabilities to govern business trans-
formation, providing a high-level abstraction of a business’s structure that helps organize
planning and improve decision-making [56].
In its exalted conceptualization, EA provides the link between strategy and execution
driven by strategic considerations such as business transformation and business agility. The
SD-based strategic architecture for enterprise transformation is an approach that utilizes SD
to support and guide the decision-making process of an enterprise facing significant change.

--- PAGE 15 ---
Systems 2025, 13, 1108 15 of 31
It covers identifying key variables in enterprise systems, modeling their interactions,
simulating strategy impacts, and developing transformation strategies accordingly. With
SD modelling, the strategic architecture should include key stocks (e.g., capital, human
resources), flows (e.g., revenues, costs), and feedback loops, validated and calibrated to
ensure that the model accurately reflects reality, and adjusted as necessary [57,58].
The strategic architecture for ESGI enterprise transformation (Figure 3) uses SD mod-
eling to guide and optimize transformation by providing specific goals and directions in
environment, society, governance and innovation. Based on ESGI objectives, the architec-
ture is constructed with relevant variables and feedback loops, identifying positive and
negative interactions among ESGI domains. By integrating ESGI into strategic architec-
ture, organizations can comprehensively understand operational complexity and develop
transformation strategies that balance environmental protection, social responsibility, good
governance and continuous innovation, achieving long-term sustainable development
while pursuing economic benefits. Each enterprise function can be used either indepen-
dently or as part of the overall architecture. Taking the business customers in the strategic
architecture as an example, we extend the relationship between the application of strategic
business innovation management with the customer choice pipeline (CCP) model. This
extension illustrates the strategic goal of transforming potential business customers into
active business customers for LMPSVs (Figure 4).
Figure 4. Transformation strategic Architecture goals for LMPSVs based on the Customer Choice
Pipeline (CCP) model for potential business customers.
Figure 4 illustrates how LMPSVs can transform potential business customers into
active ones through strategic developments such as increasing awareness, building brand
image, providing customized solutions, strengthening customer interaction, excellent
customer service, maintaining customer relationships, conducting follow-up and feedback,
and mining customer value [25]. The main advantage of using the CCP model is that it
provides a clear strategic framework, helping LMPSVs understand the customer’s decision-
making process and guide them from awareness to consumption, leading to a more effective
marketing strategy. Additionally, this approach emphasizes the importance of building
long-term relationships with customers to ensure sustained business performance and
revenue. The conversion logic of the customer choice pipeline (CCP) model needs to be
transformed into concrete business processes, including customer touchpoint management,
conversion path design, service delivery processes, etc., which provides clear process
blueprints and operational models for the Business Architecture layer.

--- PAGE 16 ---
Systems 2025, 13, 1108 16 of 31
4.3. ESGI Enterprise Life Cycle Sustainability Assessment
With the increasing popularity of ESG reporting, concerns about the reliability and
completeness of ESG disclosures are also growing. Those concerns may be alleviated by
Life Cycle Assessment (LCA), a widely used approach for a thorough and comprehensive
evaluation of environmental impacts [59]. Sustainability assessment should encompass
all three dimensions (environmental, economic, and social) using a life cycle perspective.
The life cycle sustainability assessment (LCSA) thus becomes a more comprehensive and
challenging framework to apply for product/services assessment. LCA is used to assess
environmental footprint, whereas life cycle costing (LCC) is employed for assessing eco-
nomic comparisons [60]. In this work, we assessed the impact of environmental protection,
social responsibility, corporate governance, and innovation strategy in the case of LMPSVs,
covering the entire process of construction, operation, and dismantling of the venue. When
undertaking an LCSA, it is important to consider the potential direct and indirect impacts
of LMPSVs at all stages of the life cycle and to seek a balance between the various aspects
to achieve true sustainability.
Corporateleadershipandculturemustalignwithmarketrealitiestoensurethelong-term
success of a firm. As companies form, grow, and mature, the management of the enterprises
also must evolve throughout the business lifecycle. What works in the introduction stage may
not be effective for a mature company [61]. The relationship between LCSA and ESGI for
LMPSVsisreflectedinthevenue’ssustainedattentionandinvestmentinenvironmental,social,
governanceandinnovationfrominceptiontogrowth,maturityandevendecline. Differentlife-
cycle-basedsustainabilityassessmentmethodsmustadoptaharmonizedapproachindefining
functional units and using consistent (ideally identical) system boundaries. To establish a
complete framework, applying a life cycle thinking lens is essential to explore the longitudinal
dimension of the impacts and possible indirect effects across environmental, social, and
economic levels. The definition of an integrated life cycle sustainability assessment framework
is currently an ongoing journey [62]. An ESGI sustainability assessment is conducted at
each life cycle stage of the LMPSVs, identifying key impacts and risk points and gathering
information related to environmental, social, governance and innovation to ensure that the
LMPSVs achieve sustainability throughout its life cycle. A generic representation of the ESGI
sustainability assessment for each stage for LMPSVs is shown as Figure 5. The purple line
represents the early growing stage; the blue line represents the majority of an organization’s
development; the red line represents the declining to termination stage.
Figure 5. ESGI life cycle sustainability assessment for LMPSVs.
In summary, a life cycle sustainability assessment of LMPSVs should integrate envi-
ronmental, social, corporate governance and innovation strategies to ensure that the venue

--- PAGE 17 ---
Systems 2025, 13, 1108 17 of 31
achieves sustainability at every stage, minimizes adverse environmental and social impacts,
and ensures corporate compliance and long-term growth.
4.4. Application of CRISP-DM Life Cycle Assessment
The CRISP-DM project proposed a comprehensive process model for conducting data
mining projects. The process model is independent of both the industry sector and the
technology used. The CRISP-DM serves as both a methodology and a program model,
offering a structured approach to solving data-related problems and providing an excellent
guide for initiating a data mining program. The generic CRISP-DM process model is useful
for planning, communication within and outside the project team, and documentation [63].
The CRISP-DM life cycle can be utilized by LMPSVs when applying techniques such
as data analytics and machine learning for project development and management. This
involves collecting data and organizing it for and modeling using the CRISP-DM data
mining process. LMPSVs can apply this framework to create SSD management models that
effectively utilize data to support perpetuity goals.
The benefit of applying CRISP-DM to SSD management modeling is that more accurate
and reliable decisions can be driven based on actual data. Continuous improvement of
LMPSVs’ sustainability performance is achieved through regular analysis and model
updating, comprehensively addressing all aspects affecting the venue’s sustainability,
including economic, environmental and social factors. By applying CRISP-DM, LMPSVs
can build a data-based SSD management model that effectively supports their sustainability
goals. This approach not only improves operational efficiency and reduces costs but also
enhances the venue’s positive impact in terms of ESGI.
4.5. Dynamic Strategic Management and Business Innovation in Practices
In seeking to build and sustain competitive advantage, managers need to develop
strategies that account for likely future changes—and that can themselves evolve in re-
sponse to changing circumstances [64]. SSD-based dynamic management strategy is based
on the insights of ESGI and CRISP-DM to develop a flexible and innovative management
strategy. By dynamically adjusting based on continuous data analysis and market feedback,
organizations can better understand and respond to changes in the external environment,
ensuring ongoing internal improvement and innovation to achieve long-term sustainability.
SSD-based strategic architecture for dynamic management is an adaptive, flexible, and
innovative management approach designed to ensure that organizations continue to thrive
amid changing environmental and market challenges. The dynamic management strategy
for corporate innovation in LMPSVs has a significant positive impact on the sustainable
operation of the venues. It can help LMPSVs realize SDGs and innovative strategies,
thereby improving their competitiveness and long-term development potential. An SSD-
based ESGI enterprise transformation strategy is not only a pathway to sustainability for
modern LMPSVs, but also key to improving competitiveness, increasing market appeal and
ensuring long-term operational success. Through the implementation of these strategies,
LMPSVs can excel in environmental protection, social responsibility, good governance and
innovation, staying ahead in today’s rapidly changing business and social environment.
4.6. ESGI Enterprise Organization Architecture
The way to adopt the principles of corporate sustainability is through the adoption
of a sustainability-oriented organizational culture, where enterprise transformation may
involve new value propositions or changes in the internal structure of the enterprise. While
more directors and executives are recognizing the importance of sustainability to their
financial success strategies, enterprises still struggle to integrate sustainability into their
core business practices and overall organizational design. For a sustainability strategy to

--- PAGE 18 ---
Systems 2025, 13, 1108 18 of 31
be effective and successful, it must be aligned with an enterprise’s structure, capabilities,
and culture [65]. Sustainable business model innovation and organization design in large
multinational corporations are increasingly seen as a key driver of competitive advantage
and corporate sustainability [66].
Organizational components also face the need to enhance performance over time,
such as improving service quality, accelerating product development or reducing staff
turnover [56]. Implementing organizational restructuring to ensure that the organizational
structure supports the achievement of ESGI goals, as well as training and career develop-
ment for employees. Fulfilling the enterprise’s ESGI metrics requires a synergistic division
of labor across multiple departments to ensure the overall management and monitoring of
the enterprise’s ESGI performance. LMPSVs can be structured according to ESGI to ensure
enterprise sustainability and long-term value creation. The organizational structure of the
ESGI Committee can be adapted to the size and needs of specific venues, and close cooper-
ation among the various departments and groups is necessary to achieve the best overall
results in achieving the ESGI objectives. The following is an example of an ESGI-based
enterprise organization structure for LMPSVs (Figure 6):
Figure 6. An example of SSD-based ESGI Enterprise Organization Architecture for LMPSVs.
When implementing the coordinated operation of various departments within the
ESGI enterprise organization structure, management should develop clear ESGI goals and
strategies. They should ensure that all departments understand the relevance of these goals
to their daily work, promoting cross-departmental cooperation, regular communication
and meetings. Conduct performance evaluations of each department’s performance in
achieving ESGI goals with feedback, coaching, and staff training and development oppor-
tunities provided to enhance employees’ ability to implement ESGI strategies. It is through
this coordinated operation that LMPSVs can effectively implement ESGI strategies and
improve overall operational efficiency and sustainability.
4.7. Application of Digital Business Operations and Decision-Making Information Flow System
Across a wide range of companies spanning diverse industries and sectors, digital
technologies are fundamentally transforming business strategies, business processes, firm
capabilities, products and services, and key interfirm relationships in extended business
networks. Operations management system (OMS) with open e-business platform and infor-
mation technology (IT) facilitation supports business operations and information flow for
decision-making in the organization. It establishes an integrated digital platform to enhance
the effectiveness and timeliness of business operations and decision-making processes.

--- PAGE 19 ---
Systems 2025, 13, 1108 19 of 31
Business infrastructure has been digitized as the interconnectivity of products, processes
and services has increased. In many companies across different industries and sectors,
digital technologies are fundamentally changing business strategies, business processes,
company capabilities, products and services, as well as key inter-firm relationships in ex-
tended business networks [67,68]. An open e-business platform typically requires diverse
products and different types of information technology to support the visual presentation of
related tasks, such as writing programs, computer graphics design, processing and editing.
Each type of task can be supported simultaneously by a variety of IT teams within or across
organizations. As a result, the performance of the teams, as well as the IT support program
and operations management, is affected by the workflow of related tasks maintained by
other teams, and their own performance affects the success of those related tasks [5]. The
decision information flow system identifies decision analysis factors to characterize the
decision-making process, and then constructs a generic data flow diagram (DFD) that
describes the “data-to-decision” flow of information, providing illustrative examples of
models in the form of DFDs for strategic, tactical, and operational decisions.
Taking the example of LMPSVs (Figure 7), the application of a digital business op-
erations and decision-making information flow system can help fulfill the ESGI goals of
sustainable development. E-business service platforms are usually diversified to present
knowledge visualization of innovation services and various IT support tasks, covering
areas such as environmental protection, social responsibility, corporate governance, and
innovation strategy. Each of the SDGs is considered as a type of project task. Within the dy-
namic OMS, each type of projects can be supported simultaneously by various departments,
both within and across organizations. As a result, the performance of each department and
the IT Support Sustainability program will be affected by the work processes of related
tasks maintained by other departments, and the department’s own performance will affect
the achievement of those related tasks. Most importantly, the IT sustainability department
should ensure not only its capacity to fulfill the volume of tasks, but also the quality of
sustainability project tasks to meet the needs, as well as the overall strategic alignment, of
e-business and IT processes.
Figure 7. Digital business operation and decision-making information flow system for LMPSVs.

--- PAGE 20 ---
Systems 2025, 13, 1108 20 of 31
Nowadays, business IT alignment has become a priority in most large organizations.
It involves aligning the information system on the business strategies of the organiza-
tion [69,70]. Strategic Business IT Alignment is one of the main goals to be achieved by
implementing EA in an organization. EA helps organizations define business, information
systems, and technology architectures that enable the alignment of business strategies
with the IT organization by developing business models, business strategies, business
processes, and organizations that are aligned with the infrastructure, applications, and
IT organization [71]. There is a correlation between the demand for e-business platform
services and the supply of dynamic IT sustainability project management. Open and inno-
vative e-business platforms and dynamic operational management systems can be mutually
reinforcing. This initiates the feedback structure of the digital business operations and
decision-making information flow system, where data analyzed from the dynamic OMS
feeds back into the e-business service platform, creating a positive feedback relationship.
Aligning the information system with the organization’s business strategies increases the
practical value of the information system, making it a strategic asset [64].
Overall, utilizing an SSD-based digital business operations and decision-making infor-
mation flow system to promote and execute ESGI not only improves the sustainability of
the LMPSVs, but also improves the venue’s business performance. Through this integrated
strategy, LMPSVs can balance social responsibility, environmental protection and economic
performance, further enhancing their competitiveness in the market.
4.8. Implementation and Monitoring of ESGI Enterprise Transformation
A strategic planning model for developing, monitoring and evaluating digital and
perpetual transformation programs in organizations, which aims to provide useful tools
for managers and practitioners in the field of digital transformation [72]. The key steps
in the implementation and monitoring of ESGI enterprise transformation for LMPSVs are
elaborated as follows:
(1) Strategy implementation:
Implement SSD-based ESGI transformation strategies and systems within the venue’s
operations, integrate ESGI objectives into daily operations and decision-making pro-
cesses, and develop specific action plans for each ESGI area, such as energy-saving
measures, community involvement programs, governance structure improvements,
and the application of innovative technologies. Ensure that the team understands
and participates in the ESGI objectives through staff training and incentives, en-
courage staff to apply these strategies in their daily work, and ensure that sufficient
resources (e.g., funding, technology, and human resource) are available to support the
implementation of the strategies.
(2) Monitoring and evaluation:
Continuously monitor the effectiveness of the implementation through data analysis
and numerical results, set key performance indicators (KPIs), and specific perfor-
mance indicators for each ESGI area, such as reduced carbon emissions, participation
in community activities, and specific indicators for governance improvement and
innovation strategies. Regularly collect and analyze relevant data, such as energy
consumption, employee and customer satisfaction survey results, to assess the ef-
fectiveness of the strategy and the progress of its implementation. Based on the
monitoring results, make necessary adjustments and improvements to the strategy, to
ensure that it continues to move towards the goal.

--- PAGE 21 ---
Systems 2025, 13, 1108 21 of 31
4.9. Feedback and Optimization of ESGI Enterprise Transformation
Current computer vision systems, especially those using machine learning techniques,
require large amounts of data and typically perform well only when dealing with previ-
ously seen patterns. As an alternative, cognitive systems combine current machine learning
algorithms with a broad range of cognitive task capabilities. The study proposes an ap-
proach based on the combination of human–computer interaction and knowledge discovery,
in which feedback discovers knowledge by enabling the user to interactively explore and
recognize useful information. This interaction allows the system to be continually trained
to acquire previously unknown knowledge and generate new insights to improve human
decision-making [73]. The key steps for feedback and optimization include:
(1) System feedback adjustment:
Optimization and adjustment based on system feedback. Regularly review the effec-
tiveness of the implementation of each ESGI strategy and make necessary adjustments
and improvements using evaluation results and feedback from employees, customers,
and communities.
(2) Update of technology and market trends:
Adopt the latest sustainable technology and innovative solutions, such as intelligent
energy-saving systems and renewable energy utilization. Update strategies to main-
tain competitiveness in response to market and industry trends, enabling LMPSVs to
continuously enhance their sustainability and ensure long-term environmental, social,
and economic benefits.
By synthesizing and analyzing the above aspects, it is possible to gain in-depth
insights that reveal the complexity and dynamics of LMPSVs in the process of im-
plementing the proposed strategic architecture for ESG enterprise transformation.
The results of the analysis not only help to understand the actual experiences and
challenges of the Kaohsiung Dome during the transformation process, but also pro-
vide valuable strategic guidance and practical references for other sports stadiums or
similar organizations.
4.10. Integration of Business Processes of LMPSVs with ESGI
The business process of a large-scale multi-purpose sports venue is a highly integrated
system, encompassing everything from strategic planning to daily operations. Management
must adopt an SSD-based strategic architecture framework to analyze market trends, set
operational goals, and formulate an ESGI strategy. These strategies must be adjusted
promptly through performance metrics, financial analysis, and satisfaction evaluations.
As Taiwan’s first modern multi-purpose sports venue, the Kaohsiung Arena’s business
processes adhere to the business process framework proposed in this study (Figure 8). The
current state of the Kaohsiung Dome’s business processes is described below.
The Kaohsiung Dome’s business processes are centered around venue rental and event
management, spanning application evaluation, site surveys, and contract negotiations. The
event planning phase involves venue configuration and technical support coordination,
and the execution phase involves venue preparation and contingency management. Finally,
the venue restoration, cost settlement, and feedback collection are completed. Customer
relationship management fosters long-term relationships by developing leads and provid-
ing customized solutions. Membership recruitment, benefits protection, and data analysis
foster loyalty. Marketing and promotion encompass brand maintenance, digital market-
ing, and promotional initiatives, reaching target audiences through diverse channels and
optimizing strategies. Facility maintenance maintains optimal condition through regular
inspections and preventive maintenance, ensuring prompt troubleshooting. Aging facil-
ities are regularly assessed and updated. Human resources management encompasses

--- PAGE 22 ---
Systems 2025, 13, 1108 22 of 31
recruitment and training, performance appraisals, and career development, as well as
scheduling tailored to event needs and ensuring regulatory compliance. Financial manage-
ment encompasses the management and control of ticketing, rentals, sponsorships, and
ancillary commercial revenue, ensuring financial health through cost monitoring, report
preparation, and budget analysis. Safety and risk management mitigates risk through secu-
rity systems, fire equipment inspections, contingency drills, risk identification, insurance
planning, and regulatory compliance. Digital services enhance the customer experience
through online ticketing platforms, mobile applications, and digital payment systems,
while enabling precise decision-making through data analysis and predictive modeling.
Sustainable development management integrates energy conservation, waste reduction,
community engagement, and the introduction of innovative technologies to ensure that
venues achieve a balanced development of environmental protection, social responsibility,
and good governance while pursuing economic benefits.
Figure 8. Kaohsiung Dome’s Business Process Architecture.
These business processes are tightly integrated through cross-departmental coordi-
nation mechanisms, enterprise resource planning systems, and data analytics platforms.
Service excellence is ensured through ISO certification, quality monitoring, and a con-
tinuous improvement cycle. A feedback optimization mechanism ensures continuous
improvement through customer feedback and data-driven decision-making. Through these
integrated and interconnected business processes, Kaohsiung Arena is able to effectively
manage operations, provide high-quality service, achieve sustainable development goals,
and maintain a competitive advantage in the market.
5. Performance Evaluation
5.1. Kaohsiung Dome Business Performance
Through an integrated research design combining literature review, data collection
and in-depth interviews, this study demonstrates that the implementation of ESGI enter-
prise transformation strategies can effectively contribute to the sustainable development
of LMPSVs.
The case illustrates that Kaohsiung Dome’s fulfillment rate of relevant sustainable
development goals in terms of environmental protection, social responsibility, corporate
governance, and innovation strategy. The LMPSVs’ performance has improved year by
year with the strategic architecture of sustainable system development for ESG enterprise
transformation. Although the impact of the COVID-19 epidemic from 2019–2021 has
seriously affected the business performance, including the utilization rate of the relevant

--- PAGE 23 ---
Systems 2025, 13, 1108 23 of 31
space, revenue and profit, Kaohsiung Dome continued to adhere to the ESGI’s SDGs
by employing SSD principles during this challenging period. Therefore, from FY2022
onwards, the operational and financial data disclosed by the Kaohsiung Dome shows
that the performance of the Kaohsiung Dome has a significant improvement trend, with
even more substantial performance gains in FY2023 (Figures 9 and 10). In conclusion,
the SSD-based ESGI enterprise transformation for LMPSVs can provide the operational
management norms for new domed venues, helping them achieve their SDGs and improve
operational performance. The lessons learned from Kaohsiung Dome can serve as a model
for the operation and management standards for new LMPSVs, especially the Dome, to
help them achieve SDGs and ensure efficient operation and management.
Figure 9. Kaohsiung Dome space utilization rate, 2009–2024.
Figure 10. Kaohsiung Dome business composition, 2009–2024.

--- PAGE 24 ---
Systems 2025, 13, 1108 24 of 31
Comparing with Figure 5 above, the operation rules for each stage of ESGI life cycle
sustainability assessment for LMPSVs are shown in Figure 11, which fully aligns with the
life cycle curve of Figure 5. Figure 10 shows the 15-year operational life cycle of Kaohsiung
Dome, highlighting its historical performance (green bar for historical data and blue line
represents the trend). The figure represents the stable growth factors of Kaohsiung Dome
in the early stage (explain WHY), including diversified activity strategies, good brand
image, active and effective marketing, government support and resources. The figure
also helps to explain the anticipated future trend (WHERE) and HOW it can happen. The
case study identifies factors that may lead to a decline in the performance of Kaohsiung
Dome, including the impact of the new coronary pneumonia epidemic, increased market
competition, and aging facilities. It also reflects Kaohsiung Dome’s current situation and
future vision. Kaohsiung Dome’s persistence with SSD transformation during the period
of sharp performance decline has enabled it to turn its operating performance from a loss
to a profit in the shortest possible time. The future vision is to achieve an ideal operating
performance of 100% per year, thereby realizing continuous growth in total revenue.
Figure 11. The operational life cycle of Kaohsiung Dome.
The Kaohsiung Dome, due to its scale and versatility, significantly contributes to the
economic prosperity and community development of the surrounding area. Key factors
includepromotingtourismandincreasedconsumption, creatingemploymentopportunities
within the arena and surrounding businesses, promoting infrastructure development and
urban regeneration, increasing commercial and property tax revenues, hosting community
engagement and cultural and sports events, fostering business and brand integration, and
enhancing the city’s international image and attractiveness.
This study further analyzes how the Kaohsiung Dome has dramatically boosted the
economic prosperity and community development of the surrounding area. According
to the statistics from Taiwan’s Ministry of the Interior’s Real Estate Transaction Register,
the market price of real estate around the Kaohsiung Dome area has risen by 18.5% in the
last three years (2021–2023) and 41.7% in the last five years (2018–2023), while the overall
increase in the administrative area over the past three years has been only 5.5%. Kaohsiung
Dome, as an LMPSV, is surrounded by connecting roads and public transportation facilities
that facilitate evacuation and ensure convenient access. Data shows that the area around

--- PAGE 25 ---
Systems 2025, 13, 1108 25 of 31
the Kaohsiung Dome is a hot spot for real estate, primarily because it combines a sports
stadium with a large-scale exhibition venue, hosting numerous exhibitions and driving
the development the surrounding business district, making it attractive for corporate
investment. Moreover, the Kaohsiung Dome adopts a comprehensive sports park plan,
with large department store annexes, greatly enhancing its leisure function, which is
particularly appealing to family-oriented homebuyers.
In conclusion, fulfilling ESGI objectives can positively impact the operational perfor-
mance of LMPSVs and enhance their competitiveness and long-term development potential.
When LMPSVs implement the ESGI objectives, the benefits can include increased employee
satisfaction and loyalty through the promotion of social responsibility and the creation of
inclusive work environments, which lead to higher productivity and reduced turnover.
Furthermore, as investors and funding agencies increasingly focus on the sustainability
performance of businesses, LMPSVs that pursuit ESGI objectives may be more likely to at-
tract investment and receive financial support. By implementing ESGI objectives, LMPSVs
will not only enhance their operational efficiency and market competitiveness, but also
establish a solid foundation for long-term sustainable development.
The research results suggest that LMPSVs can effectively promote their sustainable
development through the adoption of ESGI strategies. This strategic architecture enables
LMPSV managers to achieve multiple objectives of economic efficiency, social responsibility,
environmental protection and good governance.
5.2. Qualitative Research Methodology of Kaohsiung Dome’s Historical Operational Performance
BasedonthehistoricaloperationaldataofKaohsiungDomepresentedinFigures 9 and 10,
this study employs a case study method, using Kaohsiung Dome as a representative case of
LMPSV. Through a longitudinal research design, 15 years (2009–2024) of historical data were
collected and analyzed to track the trends of key indicators such as space utilization rate,
revenue structure, and business composition, providing an empirical foundation for construct-
ing system dynamics models. The study collected official operational reports, financial data,
activity records, and other materials through document analysis methods, and employed
contextual analysis to specifically examine the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic (2020–2022)
on venue operations. The red dashed box in the figures clearly indicates the severe impact
of the pandemic on space utilization, revenue, and profit, revealing the necessity for venue
sustainability transformation. The study combined multiple data sources and indicators for
triangulation, visualized long-term data trends for pattern recognition, and these operational
patterns and structural changes provided empirical support for constructing causal relation-
ships and feedback loops in the system dynamics model. The study adopted a theory-driven
data interpretation approach, interpreting quantitative data within the framework of sustain-
able system development (SSD) theory and ESGI; for example, the operational difficulties
during the pandemic highlighted the need for venues to develop diversified revenue sources,
enhance digital capabilities, and strengthen operational resilience. This mixed methods ap-
proach combines the objectivity of quantitative data with the depth of qualitative analysis,
providingasolidempiricalfoundationfordevelopingstrategicarchitecture(SA)andenterprise
architecture (EA).
5.3. A Critical Comparison of the ESG Framework and Traditional Competitive Models
for LMPSVs
The Strategic Architecture Development System (STAS) is built upon an ESG frame-
work. A critical comparison of the ESG framework for LMPSVs with traditional competitive
models reveals both strengths and limitations. The ESG framework emphasizes environ-
mental sustainability, social responsibility, and transparent governance, focusing on long-
term value creation, stakeholder balance, and sustainable development. It is particularly

--- PAGE 26 ---
Systems 2025, 13, 1108 26 of 31
well-suited to modern society’s expectations for corporate social responsibility and can
enhance venue brand image, reduce environmental risks, and strengthen social recognition.
However, its challenges lie in the difficulty of quantifying performance indicators, the lack
of clear short-term financial benefits, and the need for cross-departmental integration and
cultural transformation.
In contrast, traditional competitive models such as Porter’s Five Forces Analysis and
Value Chain Analysis focus on market competition, cost-effectiveness, and profitability, pro-
viding clear competitive positioning and strategic direction. Their performance indicators
are clear and easily measurable, but they tend to overlook environmental sustainability and
social impact. Overemphasizing short-term financial performance can sacrifice long-term
development, and they rarely consider the diverse needs of stakeholders. The strategic
framework development system is built based on the ESG framework, attempting to inte-
grate the advantages of both, incorporating environmental protection, social responsibility
and good governance while pursuing economic performance. Through a balanced score-
card or multi-dimensional performance indicator system, ESG factors are combined with
traditional financial indicators, enabling sports venues to maintain competitiveness while
achieving sustainable development goals, creating triple value in the economy, the environ-
ment and society. However, the challenge of this integrated framework is that it requires a
more complex management system, higher resource investment and a determination for
organizational change.
6. ESG Transformation and Management Implications
This study provides a comprehensive framework for transformation by integrating
the four dimensions of environment, society, governance and innovation. Compared with
the traditional stadium management, this study centers on the application of the ESGI
enterprise transformation for the implementation of sustainable operation and innovative
strategy management of LMPSVs. The following key findings were made:
First, the strategic architecture of SSD provides new perspectives and pathways for the
sustainable transformation of venues. Systems thinking, cross-disciplinary integration, and
multi-participation are highly compatible with the inherent requirements of sustainable
transformation of venues.
Second, the ESGI framework provides a comprehensive and systematic approach
for the sustainable transformation of venues. This framework overcomes the limitations
of existing studies that focus on one-dimensional, static analyses, and provides a com-
prehensive, systematic, and dynamically optimized top-level design solution for venue
transformation [74].
Third, multi-stakeholder engagement is one of the key components in the sustainable
transformation of venues. The study found that the collaborative participation of multiple
stakeholders, including government, community, partners, and the public, plays an indis-
pensable role in promoting the sustainable transformation of venues. The establishment
of an open, transparent, and shared stakeholder participation mechanism can help to
stimulate the subjectivity of all parties, gather diversified resources and wisdom, overcome
difficulties, and create a new situation for transformation and development [75].
Fourth, building a sustainable system with SSD principles is a driving mechanism of
the core competitiveness of venues in the new era: Sustainable development is increasingly
becoming a key indicator of a venue’s core competitiveness. Environmental protection,
social responsibility, corporate governance, and innovation strategies have become strategic
focal points for modern venues [76]. The concept of sustainable development has led to
profound changes in the management model of venues, which is significant for pioneering
the development of venues of high quality in the new era.

--- PAGE 27 ---
Systems 2025, 13, 1108 27 of 31
Lastly, systematic institutional support and top-down design are among the critical
factors in the sustainable transformation of venues: The government should play the
key roles of institutional support and strategic leadership to create a favorable policy
environment and industrial ecology to encourage various types of venues to adopt the
concept of sustainable development and accelerate their transformation and upgrading.
In summary, this study applied the SSD concept and the ESGI framework to systemat-
ically explore the sustainable transformation path of LMPSVs, yielding new findings and
insights. These findings have enriched and developed the theoretical knowledge in the
related fields, providing an action guide for the practice of venue transformation, and have
reference value for optimizing the governance system and improving the policy supply. At
the practical level, this study has important implications for LMPSV managers and policy
makers. The proposed strategic architecture for ESGI enterprise transformation offers
specific operational guidelines that help LMPSVs adjust their operation and management
strategies to better meet the challenges of global sustainable development and promote the
realization of social responsibility.
7. Conclusions
This study proposes a strategic architecture of sustainable system development and
examines how LMPSVs can implement ESGI enterprise transformation through a compre-
hensive analysis and empirical research. The findings clearly demonstrate that by adopting
the ESGI approach, LMPSVs can achieve environmental protection, enhance social respon-
sibility, strengthen governance transparency, and stimulate innovation while promoting
economic efficiency, thereby contributing to the achievement of SDGs.
The significance of this study lies in providing clear guidance on ESGI transformation
strategies for LMPSVs, filling a knowledge gap in the existing literature, and providing
valuable insights and recommendations for stadium managers, policy makers, and sustain-
ability researchers. Through this study, relevant stakeholders will be able to gain a deeper
understanding of how LMPSVs can achieve a balance and integration of multiple ESG
objectives through transformation strategies. These findings suggest the need to re-examine
the pathways and approaches to sustainable transformation from several perspectives. The
significance of this study lies in the following aspects:
(1) Theoretical contribution:
This study integrates the principles of SSD and proposes the ESGI framework with real-
world applications to the sustainable transformation of LMPSVs, enriching the theoretical
connotation of sustainable development of sports venues. It provides clear ESGI strategic
guidance for the sustainable transformation of LMPSVs, filling the knowledge gap in the
existing literature. The study has deepened the academic community’s understanding of
the rules and paths of sustainable transformation of venues. Additionally, it has provided
new theoretical perspectives and analytical frameworks for future research [71], thereby
contributing to theoretical advances in related research areas.
(2) Practical guidance:
The research reveals the challenges and constraints encountered during the imple-
mentation of the ESGI strategy, such as resource allocation, technological innovation, and
differences in the understanding of the concept of sustainability, providing valuable insights
and recommendations for venue managers, decision-makers, and sustainability researchers.
This helps them re-examine the paths and methods of sustainable transformation from
multiple perspectives. The ESGI transformation strategy framework and best practices
examined in this study can provide knowledge and action guidelines for venues in plan-
ning sustainable development blueprints, optimizing operation and management modes,
innovating service and product supply lines, and deepening social resource integration.

--- PAGE 28 ---
Systems 2025, 13, 1108 28 of 31
This can inspire more high-quality and replicable transformation practices to promote the
industry’s transformation and upgrading.
(3) Stakeholder participation:
This study emphasizes the need for joint participation and continuous efforts of all
stakeholders in the sustainable transformation process of LMPSVs. The case analysis helps
to enhance stakeholders’ understanding and recognition of how LMPSVs can balance and
integrate social, economic, and environmental objectives through transformation strategies
under the current global sustainability challenges, promoting multi-party collaboration
and forming synergy.
(4) Policy implications:
The driving factors and mechanisms of the sustainable transformation of venues
analyzed in this study offer valuable insights to improve the relevant legal system, optimize
the provision of public services, and innovate the mode of social governance [77]. In
particular, the study highlights the importance of collaborative participation among the
government, the market and society, which can provide useful insights for the government
departments to formulate supportive policies for the sustainable development of venues
and create a favorable industrial ecological environment.
This study offers comprehensive perspectives on the effective implementation of ESGI
enterprise transformation strategies in LMPSVs, while also identifying practical challenges
and future research directions. It underscores that achieving sustainable LMPSV devel-
opment requires a strategic architecture supporting systematic planning, implementation,
joint participation and continuous efforts of all stakeholders.
Despite the case study’s characteristics and limitations, the systematic exploration
of SSD theory and the ESGI framework in LMPSV transformation has made important
theoretical and practical contributions. The research results inspire us to further explore
how to overcome these challenges and how to utilize new technologies and management
concepts to promote the sustainable development of LMPSVs, providing important ref-
erences and inspiration for future research in related fields. Future research can further
deepen the integration of SSD and ESGI, expand the diversified construction paths of
sustainable venues, and distill richer and more robust theoretical knowledge through multi-
dimensional perspectives and cross-contextual comparisons. It empowers the systematic
and overall changes in the governance system and governance capacity of sports venues
and contributes academic strength to the comprehensive construction of a strong sports
nation and the promotion of high-quality development.
Author Contributions: M.-R.Y., conceptualization, methodology, investigation, supervision, writing,
review and editing; C.-H.C., conceptualization, methodology, investigation and supervision; H.-L.C.,
investigation, project administration, data collection, writing, review and editing. All authors have
read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research received no external funding.
Data Availability Statement: Data is unavailable due to privacy and ethical restrictions.
Acknowledgments: We would like to thank Kaohsiung Dome for supporting on-site visit and
investigations with detailed information and empirical data.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
Abbreviations
The following abbreviations are used in this manuscript:
ADM Architecture Development Method
BREEAM Building Research Establishment Environmental Assessment Method
CRISP-DM Cross-Industry Standard Process for Data Mining

--- PAGE 29 ---
Systems 2025, 13, 1108 29 of 31
DFD Data Flow Diagram
DSS Decision Support System
EA Enterprise Architecture
EAM Enterprise Architecture Management
ESGI Environmental, Social, Governance, Innovation
IT Information Technology
KPIs Key Performance Indicators
LCSA Life Cycle Sustainability Assessment
LEED Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design
LMPSVs Large Multi-Purpose Sports Venues
OMS Operations management system
PPP Public-Private Partnerships
SA Strategic Architecture
SD System Dynamics
SDGs Sustainable Development Goals
SSD Sustainable System Development
STAS Strategic Architecture Development System
TOGAF The Open Group Architecture Framework
References
1. United Nations. Transforming Our World: The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development; Department of Economic and Social Affairs,
United Nations: New York, NY, USA, 2015; Volume 1, p. 41.
2. Kellison, T.; Trendafilova, S.; McCullough, B. Considering the social impact of sustainable stadium design. Int. J. Event Manag.
Res. 2015, 10, 63–83.
3. Casper, J.M.; McCullough, B.P.; Pfahl, M.E. Examining environmental fan engagement initiatives through values and norms with
intercollegiate sport fans. Sport Manag. Rev. 2020, 23, 348–360. [CrossRef]
4. Sartore-Baldwin, M.L.; McCullough, B. Equity-based sustainability and ecocentric management: Creating more ecologically just
sport organization practices. Sport Manag. Rev. 2018, 21, 391–402. [CrossRef]
5. Yan, M.J. Handbook of Sustainable System Development for Strategic Management and Business Innovation, 2nd ed.; Vital Wellspring
Group: Singapore, 2022; ISBN 978-986-06857-1-8.
6. Sterman, J. Business Dynamics: Systems Thinking and Modeling for a Complex World; McGraw-Hill Education: Columbus, OH,
USA, 2000.
7. Senge, P. The necessary revolution: How individuals and organisations are working together to create a sustainable world. Manag.
Today 2008, 24, 54–57.
8. Meadows, D.H. Thinking in Systems; Chelsea Green Publishing: White River Junction, VT, USA, 2008.
9. Swanson, J. Business dynamics—Systems thinking and modeling for a complex world. J. Oper. Res. Soc. 2002, 53, 472–473. [CrossRef]
10. Hjorth, P.; Bagheri, A. Navigating towards sustainable development: A system dynamics approach. Futures 2006, 38, 74–92. [CrossRef]
11. Kellert, S.R.; Heerwagen, J.; Mador, M. Biophilic Design: The Theory, Science and Practice of Bringing Buildings to Life; John Wiley &
Sons: Hoboken, NJ, USA, 2011.
12. Agarwal, R.; Chandrasekaran, S.; Sridhar, M. Imagining Construction’s Digital Future; McKinsey & Company: Chicago, IL, USA,
2016; Volume 24, pp. 1–13.
13. Fried, G.; Kastel, M. Managing Sport Facilities; Human Kinetics: Champaign, IL, USA, 2020.
14. Arnstein, S.R. A ladder of citizen participation. J. Am. Inst. Plan. 1969, 35, 216–224. [CrossRef]
15. Hu, K.H.; Chen, F.H.; Tzeng, G.H. Evaluating the improvement of sustainability of sports industry policy based on MADM.
Sustainability 2016, 8, 606. [CrossRef]
16. Cole, R.J. Building environmental assessment methods: Redefining intentions and roles. Build. Res. Inf. 2005, 33, 455–467.
[CrossRef]
17. Morgan, H.; Bush, A.; McGee, D. The contribution of sport to the sustainable development goals: Insights from commonwealth
games associations. J. Sport Dev. 2021, 9, 14–29.
18. Lucas, S.; Pinheiro, M.D.; de la Cruz Del Río-Rama, M. Sustainability Performance in Sport Facilities Management. In Sports
Management as an Emerging Economic Activity: Trends and Best Practices; Springer Nature: Cham, Switzerland, 2017; pp. 113–138.
19. Kuzmina, J.; Lindemane, M. ESG Investing: New challenges and new opportunities. J. Bus. Manag. 2017, 14, 85–98.
20. Glibo, I.; Misener, L.; Koenigstorfer, J. Strategic sustainable development in international sport organisations: A Delphi study.
Sustainability 2022, 14, 9874. [CrossRef]

--- PAGE 30 ---
Systems 2025, 13, 1108 30 of 31
21. Hamel, G.; Prahalad, C.K. The core competence of the corporation. Harv. Bus. Rev. 1990, 68, 79–91.
22. Kiernan, M.J. The new strategic architecture: Learning to compete in the twenty-first century. Acad. Manag. Perspect. 1993, 7, 7–21.
[CrossRef]
23. Sterman, J.D. Interactive web-based simulations for strategy and sustainability: The MIT Sloan learningedge management flight
simulators, Part I. Syst. Dyn. Rev. 2014, 30, 89–121. [CrossRef]
24. Yan, M.R. Project-based competition and policy implications for sustainable developments in building and construction sectors.
Sustainability 2015, 7, 15423–15448. [CrossRef]
25. Yan, M.R. Improving entrepreneurial knowledge and business innovations by simulation-based strategic decision support system.
Knowl. Manag. Res. Pract. 2018, 16, 173–182. [CrossRef]
26. Yan, M.R.; Tran-Danh, N.; Hong, L.Y. Knowledge-based decision support system for improving e-business innovations and
dynamic capability of IT project management. Knowl. Manag. Res. Pract. 2019, 17, 125–136. [CrossRef]
27. Saha, P. Enterprise Architecture for Connected E-Government: Practices and Innovations; Information Science Reference: Hershey, PA,
USA, 2012.
28. Malyzhenkov, P.; Ivanova, M. An Enterprise Architecture-Based Approach to the IT-Business Alignment: An Integration of
SAM and TOGAF Framework. In Workshop on Enterprise and Organizational Modeling and Simulation; Springer Nature: Cham,
Switzerland, 2017; pp. 159–173.
29. The Open Group. TOGAF® Standard, version 9.2; Van Haren Publishing: Hertogenbosch, The Netherlands, 2018. Available
online: https://www.opengroup.org/togaf (accessed on 1 December 2025).
30. Kotter, J.P. Leading change: Why transformation efforts fail. In Museum Management and Marketing; Routledge: Abingdon, UK,
2007; pp. 20–29.
31. Müller, A.L.; Pfleger, R. Business transformation towards sustainability. Bus. Res. 2014, 7, 313–350. [CrossRef]
32. ISO 14040; Environmental Management-Life Cycle Assessment-Principles and Framework. International Standard Organization:
Vernier, Switzerland, 1997.
33. Vandenbroucke, M.; Galle, W.; De Temmerman, N.; Debacker, W.; Paduart, A. Using life cycle assessment to inform decision-
making for sustainable buildings. Buildings 2015, 5, 536–559. [CrossRef]
34. Francis, A.E.; Webb, M.; Desha, C.; Rundle-Thiele, S.; Caldera, S. Environmental sustainability in stadium design and construction:
A systematic literature review. Sustainability 2023, 15, 6896. [CrossRef]
35. Russell-Smith, S.V.; Lepech, M.D. Cradle-to-gate sustainable target value design: Integrating life cycle assessment and construction
management for buildings. J. Clean. Prod. 2015, 100, 107–115. [CrossRef]
36. Tang, S.; Fan, Z.; Zong, X.; Zhang, D.; Liu, M. A Sustainability Evaluation Approach for the Operation Cycle of Stadiums by
Integrating Multidimensional Data. 2022. Available online: http://ssrn.com/abstract=4172103 (accessed on 1 December 2025).
37. Chapman, P.; Clinton, J.; Kerber, R.; Khabaza, T.; Reinartz, T.; Shearer, C.; Wirth, R. CRISP-DM 1.0: Step-by-Step Data Mining Guide;
SPSS Inc: Chicago, IL, USA, 2000; p. 10.
38. Garcia de Baquedano, G. Data-Driven Decisions in Sports. Master’s Thesis, Luleå University of Technology, Luleå, Sweden, 2023.
39. Shi, H. Application of artificial intelligence technology in the information management of sports venues. Rev. Ibérica Sist. E Tecnol.
Inf. 2015, 16, 150.
40. Yan, H.; Yan, M.R.; Zhang, Y.; Cong, Z.; Li, J.; Lin, Z. Managing knowledge of dynamic capability for business excellence: A
transformative systems approach. Knowl. Manag. Res. Pract. 2025, 1–15. [CrossRef]
41. Doppelt, B. Leading Change Toward Sustainability: A Change-Management Guide for Business, Government and Civil Society; Routledge:
Abingdon, UK, 2017.
42. Westerman, G.; Bonnet, D.; McAfee, A. Leading Digital: Turning Technology into Business Transformation; Harvard Business Press:
Brighton, MA, USA, 2014.
43. Aldoseri, A.; Al-Khalifa, K.N.; Hamouda, A.M. AI-Powered Innovation in Digital Transformation: Key Pillars and Industry
Impact. Sustainability 2024, 16, 1790. [CrossRef]
44. Ducange, P.; Fazzolari, M.; Petrocchi, M.; Vecchio, M. An effective Decision Support System for social media listening based on
cross-source sentiment analysis models. Eng. Appl. Artif. Intell. 2019, 78, 71–85. [CrossRef]
45. Yin, R.K. Qualitative Research from Start to Finish; Guilford Publications: New York, NY, USA, 2015.
46. Eisenhardt, K.M.; Graebner, M.E. Theory building from cases: Opportunities and challenges. Acad. Manag. J. 2007, 50, 25–32.
[CrossRef]
47. Edmondson, A.C.; McManus, S.E. Methodological fit in management field research. Acad. Manag. Rev. 2007, 32, 1246–1264.
[CrossRef]
48. Kvale, S.; Brinkmann, S. Interviews: Learning the Craft of Qualitative Research Interviewing; Sage Publications: London, UK, 2009.
49. DeWalt, K.M.; DeWalt, B.R. Participant Observer: A Guide for Fieldworkers; Rowman Altamira: Lanham, MD, USA, 2011.
50. Bowen, G.A. Document analysis as a qualitative research method. Qual. Res. J. 2009, 9, 27–40. [CrossRef]
51. Patton, M.Q. Qualitative Research Evaluation Methods: Integrating Theory and Practice; Sage Publications: London, UK, 2014.

--- PAGE 31 ---
Systems 2025, 13, 1108 31 of 31
52. Li, T.T.; Wang, K.; Sueyoshi, T.; Wang, D.D. ESG: Research progress and future prospects. Sustainability 2021, 13, 11663. [CrossRef]
53. Korhonen, J.J.; Molnar, W.A. Enterprise architecture as capability: Strategic application of competencies to govern enterprise
transformation. In Proceedings of the 2014 IEEE 16th Conference on Business Informatics, Geneva, Switzerland, 14–17 July 2014;
Volume 1, pp. 175–182.
54. Simon, D.; Fischbach, K.; Schoder, D. An exploration of enterprise architecture research. Commun. Assoc. Inf. Syst. 2013, 32, 1.
[CrossRef]
55. Hendrickx, H.H. Business architect: A critical role in enterprise transformation. J. Enterp. Transform. 2015, 5, 1–29. [CrossRef]
56. Kitsios, F.; Kamariotou, M. Business strategy modelling based on enterprise architecture: A state of the art review. Bus. Process
Manag. J. 2019, 25, 606–624. [CrossRef]
57. Yan, M.R.; Hong, L.Y.; Warren, K. Integrated knowledge visualization and the enterprise digital twin system for supporting
strategic management decision. Manag. Decis. 2022, 60, 1095–1115. [CrossRef]
58. Yan, M.R.; Yan, H.; Han, F.M.; Zhang, Y.; Yan, X. Evaluation of Digital Transformation Strategies Through Dynamic Business
Modeling and Scenario Analysis. Eval. Rev. 2025 early view.
59. Jiang, L.; Gu, Y.; Yu, W.; Dai, J. Blockchain-Based Life Cycle Assessment System for ESG Reporting. 2022. Available online:
http://ssrn.com/abstract=4121907 (accessed on 1 December 2025).
60. Kalbar, P.P.; Das, D. Advancing life cycle sustainability assessment using multiple criteria decision making. In Life Cycle
Sustainability Assessment for Decision-Making; Elsevier: Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 2020; pp. 205–224.
61. Koplyay, T.; Chillingworth, L.; Mitchell, B. Corporate lifecycles: Modelling the dynamics of innovation and its support infrastruc-
ture. Technol. Innov. Manag. Rev. 2013, 3, 22–29. [CrossRef]
62. Zanni, S.; Awere, E.; Bonoli, A. Life cycle sustainability assessment: An ongoing journey. Life Cycle Sustain. Assess. Decis.-Mak.
2020, 57–93.
63. Wirth, R.; Hipp, J. CRISP-DM: Towards a standard process model for data mining. In Proceedings of the 4th International
Conference on the Practical Application of Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, Manchester, UK, 11–13 April 2000; Volume 1,
pp. 29–39.
64. Warren, K. The dynamics of strategy. Bus. Strategy Rev. 1999, 10, 1–16. [CrossRef]
65. Gutterman, A.S. Managing Sustainability; Routledge: Abingdon, UK, 2020.
66. Bocken, N.M.; Geradts, T.H. Barriers and drivers to sustainable business model innovation: Organization design and dynamic
capabilities. Long Range Plan. 2020, 53, 101950. [CrossRef]
67. Warren, K. Strategic Management Dynamics; John Wiley & Sons: Hoboken, NJ, USA, 2008.
68. Bharadwaj, A.; El Sawy, O.A.; Pavlou, P.A.; Venkatraman, N.V. Digital business strategy: Toward a next generation of insights.
MIS Q. 2013, 37, 471–482. [CrossRef]
69. Yan, M.R.; Hong, L.Y.; Hu, R.R. Benchmarking knowledge management practices and digital empowerment for business
excellence in Asia. Knowl. Manag. Res. Pract. 2025, 1–15. [CrossRef]
70. Yan, M.R.; Shajek, A.; Hartmann, E.A. Digital Work in East Asia. In New Digital Work: Digital Sovereignty at the Workplace; Springer
Nature: Cham, Switzerland, 2023; pp. 171–194.
71. Kurniawan, N.B. Enterprise Architecture design for ensuring strategic business IT alignment (integrating SAMM with TOGAF 9.1).
In Proceedings of the 2013 Joint International Conference on Rural Information & Communication Technology and Electric-Vehicle
Technology (rICT & ICeV-T), Bandung, Indonesia, 26–28 November 2013; pp. 1–7.
72. Santarsiero, F. Developing a strategic planning model for developing, monitoring and evaluating digital transformation initiatives:
A soft system approach. Meas. Bus. Excell. 2023, 27, 449–459. [CrossRef]
73. de Oliveira, C.S.; Sanin, C.; Szczerbicki, E. Human Feedback and Knowledge Discovery: Towards Cognitive Systems Optimization.
Procedia Comput. Sci. 2020, 176, 3093–3102. [CrossRef]
74. Madsen, H.L.; Ulhøi, J.P. Sustainable visioning: Re-framing strategic vision to enable a sustainable corporate transformation. J.
Clean. Prod. 2021, 288, 125602. [CrossRef]
75. Kuenkel, P.; Kuenkel, P. Stewarding Sustainability Transformations in Multi-Stakeholder Collaboration: An Emerging Theory and Practice
of SDG Implementation; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2019; pp. 141–205.
76. McCullough, B.P.; Orr, M.; Watanabe, N.M. Measuring externalities: The imperative next step to sustainability assessment in
sport. J. Sport Manag. 2019, 34, 393–402. [CrossRef]
77. Cornelissen, S.; Bob, U.; Swart, K. Towards redefining the concept of legacy in relation to sport mega-events: Insights from the
2010 FIFA World Cup. Dev. South. Afr. 2011, 28, 307–318. [CrossRef]
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.