--- PAGE 1 ---
Journal of Systems Engineering and Electronics
Vol. 31, No. 1, February 2020, pp.95–108
An approach to measuring business-IT alignment
maturity via DoDAF2.0
ZHANG Mengmeng1,*
, CHEN Honghui1
, MAO Yi2
, and LUO Aimin1
1. Science and Technology on Information Systems Engineering Laboratory, National University of Defense Technology,
Changsha 410072, China; 2. State Key Laboratory of Air Traffic Management System and Technology, Nanjing 210014, China
Abstract: Measuring the business-IT alignment (BITA) of an or-
ganization determines its alignment level, provides directions for
further improvements, and consequently promotes the organiza-
tional performances. Due to the capabilities of enterprise archi-
tecture (EA) in interrelating different business/IT viewpoints and
elements, the development of EA is superior to support BITA mea-
surement. Extant BITA measurement literature is sparse when it
concerns EA. The literature tends to explain how EA viewpoints
or models correlate with BITA, without discussing where to collect
and integrate EA data. To address this gap, this paper attempts
to propose a specific BITA measurement process through asso-
ciating a BITA maturity model with a famous EA framework: DoD
Architectural Framework 2.0 (DoDAF2.0). The BITA metrics in the
maturity model are connected to the meta-models and models
of DoDAF2.0. An illustrative ArchiSurance case is conducted to
explain the measurement process. Systematically, this paper ex-
plores the process of BITA measurement from the viewpoint of EA,
which helps to collect the measurement data in an organized way
and analyzes the BITA level in the phase of architecture develop-
ment.
Keywords: business-IT alignment (BITA), measurement, en-
terprise architecture (EA), DoD Architectural Framework 2.0
(DoDAF2.0), meta-model.
DOI: 10.21629/JSEE.2020.01.11
1. Introduction
The importance of business and IT alignment (BITA) has
been well known since the 1990s [1–5]. BITA persists
among the top-ranked concerns of business and IT execu-
tives in the last several decades [6]. Scholars tend to align
the business and IT elements bidirectionally and evolve in
the same direction. It demands a holistic view and sus-
tainable interrelations between business processes, orga-
nizational structures, and IT systems, and helps to maxi-
mize IT investmentsand organizationalperformances.The
Manuscript received January 18, 2019.
*Corresponding author.
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation
of China (71571189) and the State Key Laboratory of Air Traffic Man-
agement System and Technology (SKLATM201806).
measurement of BITA determines the alignment level of
an organization,and benefits further BITA governanceand
improvements [7–12]. However, the extant literature is
inadequate in collecting the measurement data [7,8]. The
correspondingorganizationcontents, which can be used to
measure BITA metrics, are not transparent in the litera-
ture. Scholars are likely to adopt questionnaire surveys or
experience-basedmethods to analyze BITA metrics, rather
than starting from organization contents.
The methodology of enterprise architecture (EA) forms
a structured and aligned collection of plans for the inte-
grated representation of the business and IT landscape of
the organization[13]. EA is a superior approachto address
BITA issues [14–16]. For example, Hinkelmann mapped
a strategic alignment model [17] to the Zachman frame-
work [18], and explained EA’s capability to measure BITA
[19]. Ori applied multiple misalignment symptoms to the
opengrouparchitectureframework(TOGAF)meta-model,
and argued that TOGAF can support the analysis of mis-
alignment measurement [20]. Due to the identification of
meta-model and models in EA frameworks, EA develops
the business and IT contents of an organizationwith a self-
consistent way. These contents help to provide data for
BITA measurement.
Throughourpreviousstudy[21],we haveidentifiedthat
the EA research on BITA measurement attracts the least
attention, compared with the other BITA research streams
combining with EA. We list fourteen representative mea-
surement studies in Table 1. Within them, we identify that
some just described the BITA measurementwith EA view-
points and models [22–25]. They tend to focus on simple
mapping methods such as matrix or tables [24–27]. The
majority of the papers collect data from questionnaires or
experiencesratherthanfromorganizationcontents[27,28],
which makes the measurement results subjective. Without
systematic guidance of data collection, the extant research
is difficult to exhibit a holistic, in-depth BITA measure-
ment analysis.

--- PAGE 2 ---
96 Journal of Systems Engineering and Electronics Vol. 31, No. 1, February 2020
Table 1 Literature analysis on BITA measurement with EA
Source Description Measurement approach
Pereira and Branco (2004) [22]
Presented a set of questions that are relevant to the
alignment issues with regard to varied enterprise roles.
Questionnaire survey
Sousa, et al. (2004) [23] Explained how alignment can be categorized on the basis of basic components. Experience analysis
Plazaola, et al. (2006,
2007, 2008) [29–31]
Displayed a process that associates the artifact of a BITA
framework to the meta-model of the Zachman framework.
Meta-model
Tapia, et al. (2007) [28]
Developed a value-based BITA maturity model based on
inter-enterprise collaborations. EA is a key metric in this model.
Model description
Questionnaire survey
Carvalho and Sousa (2008a,
2008b) [24,25]
Proposed a misalignment model to understand, classify,
and manage misalignment through a medical sciences approach.
Experience analysis
Kang, et al. (2010) [26]
Developed a strategy alignment model based on the business
EA from strategy, enterprise process, and enterprise resource.
Meta-model
Elhari and Bounabat (2011) [32]
Introduced a platform for modeling EA and assessing
strategic alignment on the basis of internal EA metrics.
Questionnaire survey
Wagter, et al. (2011) [27]
Proposed an instrument to assess enterprise coherence
from four levels.
Model description
Questionnaire survey
Clark and Barn (2013) [33]
Introduced an EA simulation language to validate the
conformance between logical EA and physical EA.
Meta-model
Ori (2014) [21]
Combined misalignment analysis to EA models, with the aim to set up
an EA-based misalignment assessment method.
Meta-model
Vasconcelos, et al. (2015) [34]
Proposed 16 metrics for assessing information system
architecture suitability. Alignment assessment is a key metric.
Model description
To address this research gap, we attempt to provide an
association process combining the BITA maturity model
[35–38] with a specific EA framework, i.e., DoD Archi-
tectural Framework 2.0 (DoDAF2.0). We will mainly dis-
cuss the mappings of each BITA metric with DoDAF2.0
meta-modelandmodels,andthencollecttherequiredmea-
suredatafromorganizationcontents.Throughthisprocess,
the BITA measurement is likely to achieve reasonable and
convincible results. The remainder of this paper is struc-
turedas follows: Section2 illustrates the background;Sec-
tion 3 explains the association thought of the BITA model
with DoDAF2.0; Section 4 describes the detailed associ-
ation process; Section 5 introduces an illustrative case to
verify the above process; and Section 6 functions as the
conclusion of this paper.
2. Theoretical background
2.1 BITA measurement
BITA measurement has been studied since Henderson
and Venkatraman proposed a strategic alignment model
in 1993 [17]. Various BITA measurement models have
sprung up in different forms since then. For example,
Muñoz and Avila reviewed the extant BITA measurement
models and methods [39]. McAdam explained the perfor-
mancemeasurementofBITA throughadynamiccapability
perspective [40]. Trienekens provided a detailed measure-
ment frameworkincludingfive main factors [7]. Gerow in-
tegratedsixtypes ofalignmentandmeasuredthemthrough
surveys [8]. Hu and Huang introduced a balanced score-
card model to measure BITA [9].
Additionally, Luftman has conducted multiple research
on BITA maturity assessment [35–38]. His maturity
model has been widely adopted in other BITA research
[41–43]. Six criteria are proposed in the maturity model.
Among them, the “communication” criterion refers to the
exchange of ideas and a clear understanding of strategies
by different roles. The “competence/value measurements”
focuses on the value of IT in terms of its contributions to
the business. The “governance” criterion ensures the busi-
ness and IT participants formally discuss and review the
priorities and allocation of IT resources. The “partnership”
explains the relationships between the business and IT or-
ganizations. The aspect of “scope and architecture” repre-
sents the maturity aspects of IT, and the “skills” criterion
means the human resource considerations in an organiza-
tion. The above six criteria and their respective metrics are
displayed in Fig. 1.
In general, collecting the varied kinds of measurement
data is difficult when applying the measurement models to
practices [29]. Experience-based methods are often used
in the literature, which conduct the inadequate and subjec-
tiveanalysis.We believethedevelopmentofEAis superior
to build a reasonable in-depth BITA measurement process,
due to its advantages of organizing information.

--- PAGE 3 ---
ZHANG Mengmeng et al.: An approach to measuring business-IT alignment maturity via DoDAF2.0 97
Fig. 1 BITA maturity framework proposed by Luftman [35–38]
2.2 EA framework
EA refers to a “fundamental description of a system, em-
bodied in its components, their relationships to each other
and the environment, and the principles governing its de-
sign and evolution” [44,45]. The EA framework acts as a
guide to design EA, due to the complexity of an organiza-
tion. In general, EA frameworks formalize multiple view-
points and models, which helps to architect abstract from
thelevelofdetailtobringenterprisedesigntasksintofocus
and produce documentation of architectural descriptions.
Varied EA frameworkshave been issued in the world, such
as Zachman framework [18], TOGAF [45], DoDAF [46],
and MoDAF [47].
Without loss of generality, the 2.0 version of DoDAF,
which exhibits eight viewpoints and quantity different
models in each viewpoint, is adopted in this paper. Among
the viewpoints, the capability viewpoint (CV) explains
the capability requirements of an organization. The opera-
tional viewpoint (OV) describes business activities and
processes. The services viewpoint (SvcV) articulates the
information system (IS) services and their relationships.
The systems viewpoint (SV) represents the systems and
their relationships. The standard viewpoint (StdV) refers
to the policy, standards, guidance, and constraints in the
organization. The data and information viewpoint (DIV)
displays the data relationships and structures of architec-
ture contents. The project viewpoint (PV) articulates the
various projects and their support for capabilities. The all
viewpoint (AV) describes the overarchingaspects of archi-
tecture contexts that relate to all views. Additionally, each
of the above viewpoints includes descriptive models, e.g.,
the organizational structure model (OV4) in OV.
In order to maintain the consistency of the architectural
contents in different models, the DoDAF2.0 develops an
overalldatameta-model(DM2).DM2displaystheabstrac-
tionoftheaboveviewpointsandmodelsasshowninFig.2.
Fig. 2 includes different data entities (e.g., “Activity”,
“Project”)andtheirrelationships(e.g.,hollowcomposition
relationship, triangle correlation relationship). These enti-
ties and relationships help to ensure the formalization of

--- PAGE 4 ---
98 Journal of Systems Engineering and Electronics Vol. 31, No. 1, February 2020
DoDAF models. For example, the organizational structure
model (OV4) is composed of the data entities including
“Performer”, “PersonType”, “Role”, and so on. Complete
DM2 can refer to DoDAF 2.0 [46].
Fig. 2 Main entities and relationships of DM2
3. Association thought
This section aims to explain the association thought be-
tween BITA measurement and EA framework. We argue
the data in EA models (Fig. 2) can be gathered to assess
metrics of the BITA measurement model (Fig. 1). Fig. 3
schematically depicts this link.
Fig. 3 The link between EA models and its associated BITA
In Fig. 3, the entire EA contents are composed of a mul-
titude of description models (formed by DM2). We can
explain the association by considering the organizational
structuremodel (OV4).If a chiefinformationofficer (CIO)
exists inthe businessstructureandfeaturesanattribute(as-
sumed as “enable business strategy”), we can suppose that
business and IT roles have developed a good communica-
tion relationship. The BITA maturity model is displayed
in Fig. 3, with 38 leaf metrics which need to be filled by
maturity values. It is obvious that the value of the metric
“Understanding of business by IT” (C1) can be explained
by the above organizational structure model. Conforming
to the five maturity levels proposed by Luftman [35], we
can assume that the maturity of C1 is situated in level 4,
with an “enable business strategy” attribute in the CIO en-
tity. According to this example, the data in one EA model
can be directly reflected as the maturity value of one BITA
metric. Sometimes, one BITA metric may be simultane-
ously supported by several EA models. Anyway, the link
between EA models and BITA models is concretely spe-
cified by the following requirement: the leaf metrics’ ma-
turity values in the BITA model are obtained by collecting

--- PAGE 5 ---
ZHANG Mengmeng et al.: An approach to measuring business-IT alignment maturity via DoDAF2.0 99
and integrating the data in one EA model or several EA
models.
In general, the meanings of BITA metrics help to iden-
tifythe supportingdata entities, whichcanbe tailoredfrom
architecturalDM2.TheexplorationoftheDM2canfurther
conclude the EA models and data in the support of BITA
measurement. To measure the BITA maturity in the sup-
port of EA contents, we will first explore the relationships
between DM2 and each BITA metric, and then determine
the corresponding EA models. Then the maturity level of
each BITA metric can be acquired with the data of these
EA models. The association process can be divided into
the following four steps.
Step 1 Identify relevant entities and relationships of
DM2 for each BITA metric, in order to gather correspond-
ing EA models;
Step 2 With regard to each BITA metric, determine
corresponding EA models based on the above entities and
relationships;
Step 3 Based on EA contents from the above models,
introduce suitable measurement methods to assess BITA
metrics;
Step 4 Measure the holistic BITA maturity with the
maturity values of all the leaf metrics.
Through these four steps, we can build mapping rela-
tionships between BITA and EA models, which make the
overall measurement reasonably and systematically. Con-
cretely, each of the four steps will be discussed in the next
section.
4. Association process
4.1 Identifying correlations between DM2 and BITA
This step aims to identify the entities and relationships of
DM2 in the support of each BITA metric. We will first
explain the meanings of BITA metrics and explore their
correspondingorganizationcontents (expressedby italics),
andthenidentifythe entities andrelationshipsin DM2.For
simplicity, the metrics under the same BITA criterion are
discussed together.
(i) Communication
In the “Communication” criterion, C1 and C2 refer to
the mutual understandingof business and IT roles. The un-
derstandingcan be measuredby determiningwhetherbusi-
ness/IT roles are involved in each other’s organizational
structures, or in the operational processes. These contents
can be checked through EA models organized by DM2.
C3 refers to the educational background of an organiza-
tion. This metric can be illustrated by the education level
ofthepersonnel.C4, meaningthe rigidityofprotocols,can
beansweredbytheconditionsofbusiness/ITprocesses. C5
demands the knowledge sharing of business and IT roles.
This metric should be checked by determining the exis-
tence of the knowledge sharing processes in an organiza-
tion. Additionally, C6 shows the effectiveness of liaison
between business and IT, which requires us to examine the
presence of liaison roles in the organizational structure.
All of the above contents, including roles, organiza-
tional structures, processes, can find corresponding ele-
ments from the DM2. The entities and relationships of
DM2 are tailored and displayed in Fig. 4. Fig. 4 in-
cludes different kinds of entities (e.g., “Performer”, “Sys-
tem”) and their relationships (e.g., “Overlap” relation,
“Wholepart” relation). The hollow arrow represents the
composition relationships, and the triangle arrow repre-
sents the relevance relationship. Fig. 4 is tailored from
DoDAF DM2. Specifically, the organization structure in-
cludes “Organization Type”, “Person Type”, and “Indivi-
dual Performer”. “Person Type” features an education at-
tribute. The “Activity” entity is performed based on multi-
ple“Conditions”and“Rules”. Thenthebusiness process is
composed by “Performers” and business “Activities”, and
the IT process is composed by “Performers” and IT “Acti-
vities”. All of the above entities can be combined to sup-
port the “Communication” metrics.
Fig. 4 DM2 fragment for “Communication” criterion

--- PAGE 6 ---
100 Journal of Systems Engineering and Electronics Vol. 31, No. 1, February 2020
(ii) Competence/value measurement
The “Competence/value measurement” criterion in-
cludes seven metrics. To identify their corresponding or-
ganizationalcontents, we arguethat V1, V2, and V3 repre-
sent the measures of the business and IT domain. They can
be explained by varied measure types of an organization.
V4 refers to the service level agreement, which should be
supported by the service structures and service measures.
V5 indicates the standards in the measurement process.
The IT assessment process of V6 can be implemented by
executing IT activities for business capabilities. Addition-
ally, V7representsthecontinuousITmeasurementandim-
provement. This metric can be exhibited through consum-
ing and allocating resources, and introducing activities for
new capabilities.
The above contents (in italics) can also be identified
in DM2. Similarly, Fig. 5 is tailored from DM2. It in-
cludes the data entities and their relationships. For ex-
ample, the “Performer” is composed by “System”, “Ser-
vice”, and “Port”, and can perform “Activity”. In Fig. 5,
“Measures” and “Measure Types” are introduced to sup-
port varied measure types in V1, V2 and V3. “Service”
and “Service port”are elements of “Performer”,which can
represent V4 with “Service Level Measure” and “Service
Level Agreement”. “Standards” can support V5. Further-
more, the combination of “Activities” and “Performers”
helps to implement “Capabilities” with “Resources”, and
consequently explains V6 and V7.
Fig. 5 DM2 fragment for “Competence/value measurement” criterion
(iii) Governance
In the “Governance” criterion, G1 refers to the business
strategy planning. This metric can be fulfilled by perform-
ing business processes in the search of business capabili-
ties. G2 displays the IT strategy planning, which can be
supported by implementing IT processes by projects. G3
demands feasible organizational structures. G4 demands
reasonable resource allocation for projects. G5 requires
the IT investment scheme in projects management. G6 re-
quiresasteeringcommitteeintheorganizationalstructure.
Furthermore,G7 represents the prioritizationprocess of IT
governance. This metric should be supported by time se-
quences of projects.
The above organization contents can be located in the
DM2. Fig. 6 determines the possible data entities and the
relationships. For example, the business “Performer” can
perform multiple “Activity” to satisfy “capability”, which
helps to support the business strategy in G1. Specifically,
the process performing “Activities” for “Capabilities” can
meet G1, and the process performing “Activities” to exe-
cute “Projects” can represent as G2. Here, the organiza-
tional structure is composed by “Organization Type” and
personnel, which can support G3 and G6. “Data” and “In-
formation” imply budgets and costs of G4. G5 and G7 are
realized by “Projects”, “Desire Effect” and “Measures”.
Thus, the “Governance” metrics can be measured by the
combination of these entities and their relationships.
(iv) Partnership
With regardto the “Partnership”criterion,P1 focuses on
thebusiness perspectiveofthe ITvalue.Thismetricshould
bemeasuredbydeterminingwhetherIT roles participatein
the business organizational structures. Similarly, P2 can
be supported by IT roles involving in the business plan-
ning processes. P3 refers to whether business and IT share
goals when executing projects. P4 represents the levels of
projects’ management. P5 refers to the trust level between
business and IT, which can be checked whether there are
corresponding standards in an organization. P6 demands
the business sponsor roles in the business domain.
The above contents including organizational structures
andprojectscan besituated in theDM2. Fig. 7explainsthe
correspondingentitiesandrelationships.Itmainlyincludes

--- PAGE 7 ---
ZHANG Mengmeng et al.: An approach to measuring business-IT alignment maturity via DoDAF2.0 101
“Performer”, “Activity”, “Project”, and their relationship
such as “BeforeAfterType” and “OverlapType”. In Fig. 7,
the organizational structure composed by “Organization
Type” and “Performer” is used to support P1 and P6. The
processesof“Performer”,“Activity”, and“Capability”can
be used to realize P2. The “Project”, “Desire Effect” and
“Measure” can be used to support P3 and P4. The “Rule”
helps to measure P5.
Fig. 6 DM2 fragment for “Governance” criterion
Fig. 7 DM2 fragment for “Partnership” criterion
(v) Scope & architecture
Under this criterion, A1 refers to the various roles re-
lated to IT architecture. A2 represents the standards in
IT architecture. A3 refers to the architecture integration
among different organizations. This metric can be sup-
ported by IT architecture and its organizational structure.
Similarly, the features of A4 can also be measured by
the performances of IT architectures. A5 refers to suitable
waysofmanagingemergingITbyspecific standards.With
regards to the above contents, the corresponding DM2 en-
tities and relationships can be drawn as Fig. 8. Here, orga-
nizationalstructures, IT architecture,andstandardscanbe
formed by “Organization Type”, “Performer”, “Activity”,
“System”, “Standard.”, and so on.

--- PAGE 8 ---
102 Journal of Systems Engineering and Electronics Vol. 31, No. 1, February 2020
Fig. 8 DM2 fragment for “Scope & architecture” criterion
(vi) Skills
The “Skill” criterion mainly includes the standards and
culture of an organization.Among them, S1 explains stan-
dards on innovation and entrepreneurship. S2 represents
the cultural locus of power, which can be illustrated by the
typesoforganizationalstructure.S3representstheskillsin
theprocessofprojectmanagement.S4expressesstandards
in enterprise change management. S5 expresses standards
of personnel training. S6 represents the market environ-
ment. S7 refers to the rules on person hiring and retiring.
The corresponding DM2 are displayed as Fig. 9, which
also specify the contents such as “Skill”, “Rule”, and
so on. Here, “Standards”, “Organizational Structures”,
“Projects”, and “Skills” can be used to support the above
metrics. The entities and relationships are displayed in
Fig. 9.
Fig. 9 DM2 fragment for “Skills” criterion
Overall, this step mainly identifies the relevant entities
and relationships of DM2 in the support of the BITA met-
rics. The organization contents reflected by the BITA met-
rics are located in the DM2. The mappings help to develop
relevant EA models and collect EA data in the next few
steps.
4.2 Determining EA models for each BITA metric
According to the above DM2 fragments, DoDAF2.0 mo-
dels can be further determined to support the BITA met-
rics. The mappings are displayed in Table 2.
In general, one BITA metric can be measured by one
or several EA models. Taking the “Communication” crite-
rion for example, C1 is supported by organizational rela-
tionships chart (OV-4)and operationalactivity model (OV-
5b). These models can be used to check whether IT roles
have been involved in business organizational structures
and business processes. Similarly, C2 is supported by or-

--- PAGE 9 ---
ZHANG Mengmeng et al.: An approach to measuring business-IT alignment maturity via DoDAF2.0 103
ganizational relationships chart (OV-4), services resource
flow description (SvcV-2), and systems resource flow de-
scription (SV-2). In addition, C3 is supported by the in-
tegrated dictionary (AV-2) and standards profile (StdV-1).
These models involve the contents of the personnel educa-
tion level. C4 is supported by the operational rules model
(OV-6a), services rules model (SvcV-10a), and systems
rules model (SV-10a), which include all of the rules in
EA. Furthermore, C5 is supported by operational activity
decomposition tree (OV-5a), which can be used to check
whether knowledge sharing activities exist in the organi-
zation. The organizational relationships chart (OV-4) can
check the presence of liaison roles in C6. With the same
way, the other metrics can be supported by EA models in
Table 2.
Table 2 DoDAF models for measuring each BITA metric
Criterion Metric Supportive EA model Explanation
C1 OV-4, OV-5b
Check whether business and IT roles share organization structures,
and whether IT roles participate in business processes.
C2 OV-4, SvcV-2, SV-2
Check whether business and IT roles share organization
structures, and whether business roles participate in IT processes.
Communications C3 AV-2, Std-1 Check whether business and IT roles receive education training.
C4 OV-6a, SvcV-10a, SV-10a Check whether the agreements in business and IT processes are rigid or not.
C5 OV-5a Check whether there exists knowledge sharing process in a firm.
C6 OV-4 Check whether there are liaison roles between business and IT.
Competence &
value measurements
V1 SvcV-7, SV-7 Check whether there are measures on IT values.
V2 CV-2, CV-5 Check whether there are measures on business values.
V3 SvcV-7, SV-7 Check whether there are measures in IT aspects to achieve business.
V4 SvcV-1, SvcV-10a Check whether there are agreements in service structure and process.
V5 Std-1 Check whether there are standards on measure benchmarking.
V6
CV-6, OV5b, SvcV-2,
SvcV-7, SV-2, SV-7
Determine whether business process and IT
process have realized relative requirements.
V7 CV-6, SvcV-5, SV-5a, SV-5b Analyze the weak points of results and provide adjustment demands.
Governance
G1 OV-2, OV-5b, CV-1, CV-3, CV-6 Express the business strategy planning.
G2 SvcV-2, SV-2, PV-1, PV-2, PV-3 Express the IT strategy planning.
G3 OV-4 Express the relationships among different person types.
G4 DIV-2, DIV-3 Check whether there is information on budgets and costs.
G5 CV-2, DIV-3, PV-2, PV-3 Analyze the IT investment in project executing process.
G6 OV-4 Check whether there exists steering committee in organizational structure.
G7
CV-3, OV-6c, SvcV-10c,
SV-10c, PV-2
Analyze the time sequence relationships in EA.
Partnership
P1 OV-4 Check whether IT participates in business organizational structure.
P2 OV-4, OV-5b, CV-6, CV-1 Check whether IT participates in business strategy planning.
P3
OV-4, PV-1, PV-2, CV3,
SvcV-7, SV-7
Check whether business and IT roles share goals
and risks in projects executing.
P4 PV-1, PV-2, PV-3 Analyze the project management activities.
P5 OV-6a, SvcV-10a, SV-10a, Std-1 Check whether there are rules or standards on trust.
P6 OV-4, CV1
Check whether there are business sponsors or champions
in organizational structure.
Scope & architecture
A1 SvcV-5, SV-5a, SV-5b Determine the enabling or driving factors in IT.
A2 Std-1 Check the IT standards.
A3 SvcV-2, SV-2, OV4 Analyze the architecture integration on functions and structures.
A4
SvcV-2, SV2, SvcV-3a, SvcV-3b,
SV-3, OV-6b, OV-6c
Analyze the performances of IT architecture, such as transparency,
agility, and flexibility.
A5 Std-2 Check whether there are standards on managing new ITs.
S1 Std-1, OV-6a, SvcV-10a, SV-10a Check whether there are standards and rules on enterprise innovation.
S2 OV-4 Analyze the organization types for power structure.
S3 OV-4, PV-1, PV-2 Analyze the management styles in projects executing.
Skills S4 Std-1, Std-2 Check whether there are standards on changes.
S5 AV-2, Std-1 Check whether there are standards on personnel training and education.
S6 AV-1, AV-2, CV-1, OV-1 Check whether there are illustrations on enterprise environments.
S7 OV-4, Std-1 Check whether there are standards on personnel retiring and hiring.

--- PAGE 10 ---
104 Journal of Systems Engineering and Electronics Vol. 31, No. 1, February 2020
The data in EA models can be used to measure BITA
metrics. For example, the contents in OV4 provide evi-
dence for C1, C2, and C6. In the next step, we will con-
sider how to use these data to calculate the alignment level
of each metric.
4.3 Measuring BITA metrics with the above models
With the above EA models, varied measurement tech-
niques can be introduced to evaluate the alignment level
of each metric. As the example of Fig. 3, the maturity level
of C1 is acquired by the automatic data collection from
OV-4. This is an automatic measurement method. Addi-
tionally, some BITA metrics cannot be directly measured
by EA contents. Measurement techniques should be intro-
duced to integrate the EA contents in different models. We
explain three measurement techniques in this paper.
(i) Automatic measurement refers to the capability of
reading EA data and calculating the maturity level auto-
matically. According to DoDAF2.0, its architecture data
is stored as XSD format based on the physical exchange
specification [46]. The architecture data of some BITA
metrics can be gathered automatically and convertedto the
maturity level directly, as the example in Fig. 3.
(ii) Semi-automatic measurement refers to the calcula-
tion of some metrics’ maturity levels through integrating
and processing different EA data. Computational formu-
las may be necessary for the integration of the EA data.
For example, with the structural data in DoDAF2.0, a net-
work connectivity algorithm can be adopted to calculate
the value of architecture flexibility (A4). Additionally, si-
mulation methods may also be introduced to operate the
EA data. For example, the architecture agility (A4) can
be simulated by experimenting architecture reaction speed
with different changes.
(iii) Manual measurement refers to the measurement of
BITA metrics with manual methods, such as questionnaire
surveys and experience-based analyses. The manual mea-
surement exhibits the incapability of EA data in the sup-
porting of the BITA metrics. For example, the enterprise
innovation and entrepreneurship metric (S1) cannot be to-
tally explained by EA standards and rules. A questionnaire
survey may be needed here.
Therefore, each BITA metric can be measured by the
abovetechniques.ThemappingsofBITAmetricsandmea-
surement techniques are displayed in Table 3, in which
the automatic measurement holds the most and the manual
measurement holds the least. Table 3 also verifies EA’s ca-
pability in the supporting of BITA measurement, because
quite a lot of metrics can be directly/indirectly measured
by EA contents.
Table 3 Measurement techniques for BITA metrics
Technique Metric
Automatic measurement
C1, C2, C3, C5, C6, V1, V2,
V3, V4, V5, G3, G4, G6, P1,
P2, P6, A1, A2, S5, S7
Semi-automatic measurement
C4, V6, V7, G1, G2, G5, G7,
P3, P4, A3, A4, A5, S2, S3, S4
Manual measurement P5, S1, S6
4.4 Measuring the holistic BITA maturity
The holistic BITA maturity of any organization can be
calculated by the maturity values of leaf metrics and the
weights among layers of Fig. 1. These weights can be ob-
tained by qualitative analysis, e.g., questionnaire surveys
[6] or quantitative analysis, e.g., structural equation mo-
deling [38,48].
Through the explanation of the above four steps, the
BITA maturity can be measured with the help of the
DoDAF2.0 meta-model and models. The next section will
validate the steps of this section with an illustrative case.
5. An illustrative case study
To demonstrate the proposed process, we introduce an
ArchiSurance case [49] in this paper. This case is often
used in the EA community.As Iacob argued[49], this case
takes the advantage of being realistic and of manageable
size without being overly simplistic. ArchiSurance is a fic-
titious company that provides the home, travel, and car
insurances. It focuses on keeping relationships with cus-
tomers, handling claims and financial issues. Iacob deve-
loped the ArchiSurance architecture with an Archimate
language[49].Wewill explaintheBITA measurementpro-
cess of the ArchiSurance case step by step.
5.1 Identifying correlations between DM2 and
BITA metrics
Forthe sake of simplicity, we will mainlycalculate the ma-
turityvaluesofarchitectureagilityandflexibility(A4).Ac-
cordingto Fig. 8, A4 is mainlysupportedby the DM2 enti-
ties such as “Organization Type”, “Performer”, “System”,
“Service”, and so on. These entities and their relationships
can form multiple EA models in Table 2.
5.2 Determining and developing DoDAF2.0 models
According to Fig. 8 and Table 2, the corresponding busi-
ness models, e.g., state transition description (OV-6b),
event-trace description (OV-6c) and application models,
e.g., services resource flow description (SvcV-2), systems-
services matrix (SvcV-3a), services-services matrix
(SvcV-3b), systems resource flow description (SV-2), and
systems-systems matrix (SV-3) need to be built to support

--- PAGE 11 ---
ZHANG Mengmeng et al.: An approach to measuring business-IT alignment maturity via DoDAF2.0 105
the architecture agility and flexibility. The above OV mod-
els explore the overall business landscape, and the SvcV
and SV models compose the physical architecture which
can support the business strategy.
We adopt the IBM Rhapsody tool to model the
ArchiSurance case. The DoDAF2.0 package is embed-
ded in the IBM Rhapsody. The entities and relationships
in IBM Rhapsody are inherited from DM2. According to
DoDAF2.0, OV-6c describes the sequence of actions in a
scenario. One OV-6c is developed in Fig. 10, which de-
scribes the time sequence of handling claims. Six opera-
tional nodes exist in this model. Among them, the “Cus-
tomer” node produces claims. The “Mailroomdeck” node
is responsible for receiving and reporting claims, and no-
tifying results to customers. The “Frontofficedeck” node
registers claims and produces claim forms. The “Backof-
ficedeck” node produces the claim decisions. The “Evalu-
ator” node assesses claims. And the “Financialdeptclerk”
node pays claims.
Fig. 10 One OV-6c
Within each operational node, there is one OV-6b that
determines the states and transfers in executing business
processes. The OV-6b of “Mailroomdeck” is exhibited in
Fig. 11, which includes six states and transfers among
the states. Operational actions and judging conditions are
listed in states and transfers, such as the ReceiveResult ac-
tion and the ClaimFlag judging condition. These actions
determine the holistic function of the operational node.
Therefore, the complete business landscape can be built
with all of the OV-6bs and OV-6cs.
In addition, the SV and SvcV models can be built based
on the above OV models. We integrate the main system
contents in one SV-2 model. The SV-2 model identifies the
system components, service components, and the actors.

--- PAGE 12 ---
106 Journal of Systems Engineering and Electronics Vol. 31, No. 1, February 2020
The SV-2 includes the operational nodes and their corre-
spondingsystems and services.This modelformsthe over-
all physical structure.
Fig. 11 OV-6b of the “Mailroomdeck” node
5.3 Measuring BITA metrics with the above
EA models
As in Section 4.3, this section aims to calculate the ma-
turity levels of architecture agility and flexibility, with the
EA data in the above models.
We argue that the architecture agility refers to the firm’s
average reaction time after receiving claims from cus-
tomers. We adopt a simulation method to execute the busi-
ness processesandtoacquiretheoverallprocessingtimein
each experiment. Input data should be determined at first.
In this paper, we assume the probability of false claims
by a customer is 10%, and that of a true claim is 90%.
We also assume that the handlingtime of each information
processing event in Fig. 10 accords with a uniform dis-
tribution U(5, 20). These events include receiving claims,
registering claims, deciding claims and notifying cus-
tomers. Additionally, the handling time of evaluating and
paying claims are also assumed to accord with a uniform
distribution U(30, 60). The unit is in minutes.
All of the OV-6b and OV-6c are simulated with the
aboverandomdatainthemodels.Theoverallreactiontime
has been acquired in each simulation. The running time
is plotted in Fig. 12 after executing 100 experiments. The
X axis represents the 100 simulation tests and the Y axis
shows the time consuming of each simulation. In Fig. 12,
quite a lot of claims have received the payments, while
several claims are false and rejected. The average reaction
time of the 100 experiments is 136.07 min. This value can
be used to measure the maturity level of the ArchiSurance
firm’s agility.
Furthermore, the architecture flexibility refers to the ex-
tent of modifying the application structure. In this paper,
the graph density can reflect the connectedness of the net-
work structure. As for the SV-2, the higher the graph den-
sity is, the higher the architecture flexibility will be. With
the help of the graph density algorithm, the graph density
of the SV-2 is 0.115, indicating a rather low level of net-
work connectedness. This result can also be converted to
the maturity level of the ArchiSurance firm’s flexibility.
Fig. 12 Reaction time of 100 simulating results
5.4 Measuring the holistic BITA maturity
Through the above illustrations, the maturity levels of ar-
chitecture agility and flexibility are separately calculated
by the simulation and network connectedness algorithm,
which provides better support for the measurement of
BITA metric. Similarly, the values of other BITA metrics
can also be acquired by different measurement techniques.
As in Section 4.4, all of the values can be converged into
the BITA maturity of the whole organization.
Overall, the whole measurement process represents our
thoughtto associate the organizations’BITA level with EA
development results. The same EA development plan may
produce different BITA results, which depend on the spe-
cific measurement techniques adopted. The four steps are
conducted structurally to make the holistic approach more
reasonable.
6. Conclusions
TomitigatetheinsufficientresearchonBITA measurement
with EA, this paper links the BITA maturity model with
DoDAF2.0 meta-model and models. The specific associa-
tion process is divided into four steps. This paper explains
each step in detail, and demonstrates the process with an
archisurance case.
This paper provides insightful contributions compared
to the previous literature. Given the inadequateBITA mea-
surement with EA, this paper proposes a thorough associ-
ation attempt and illustrates the combination clearly. Fur-
ther, this paper puts more emphasis on data collection and

--- PAGE 13 ---
ZHANG Mengmeng et al.: An approach to measuring business-IT alignment maturity via DoDAF2.0 107
integration from EA models. These contributions help to
promote the research of combining BITA with EA. How-
ever,limitationsstill exist.Forexample,thispaperdoesnot
explain the entities of DM2 and DoDAF models in detail,
and this paper does not apply the association to a practical
case. These limitations demand motivations for further re-
search. To validate the capability of the proposed method,
we will conduct practical research in the next step.
References
[1] PARKER M, BENSON R. Information economics. Engle-
wood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice-Hall, 1988.
[2] BRANCHEAU J, WETHERBE J. Issues in information sys-
tems management. MIS Quarterly, 1987, 11(1): 23–45.
[3] DIXON P J, JOHN D A. Technology issues facing corporate
management in the 1990s. MIS Quarterly, 1989, 13(3): 247–
255.
[4] NIEDERMAN F, BRANCHEAU J, WETHERBE J. Informa-
tion systems management issues for the 1990s. MIS Quarterly,
1991, 15(4): 475–495.
[5] HENDERSON J, VENKATRAMAN N. Aligning business
and IT strategies. LUFTMAN J N. Competing in the infor-
mation age: practical applications of the strategic alignment
model. New York: Oxford University Press, 1996.
[6] AVISON D, JONES J, POWELL P, et al. Using and validating
the strategic alignment model. The Journal of Strategic Infor-
mation Systems, 2004, 13(3): 223–246,
[7] TRIENEKENS J J, KUSTERS R J, CUENCA L. Measur-
ing business-IT alignment, framework development and case
study results. Information System Development, 2014: 1–16.
[8] GEROW J E, THATCHER J B, GROVER V. Six types of IT-
business strategic alignment: an investigation of the constructs
and their measurement. European Journal of Information Sys-
tems, 2015, 24(5): 465–491.
[9] HUANG C D, HU Q. Achieving IT-business strategic align-
ment via enterprise-wide implementation of balanced score-
cards. Information Systems Management, 2007, 24(2): 173–
184.
[10] MAGOULAS T, HADZIC A, SAARIKKO T, et al. Alignment
in enterprise architecture: a comparative analysis of four archi-
tectural approaches. Electronic Journal Information Systems
Evaluation, 2012, 15(1): 88–101.
[11] SABHERWAL R, CHAN Y E. Alignment between business
and IS strategies: a study of prospectors, analyzers, and de-
fenders. Information Systems Research, 2001, 12(1): 11–33.
[12] WEILL P, ROSS J W. IT governance: how top performers
manage IT decision rights for superior results. Boston: Har-
vard Business School Press, 2004.
[13] Niemann K D. From enterprise architecture to IT governance.
Wiesbaden: Friedr Vieweg & Sohn Verlag, 2006.
[14] WEGMANN A, REGEV G, LOISON B. Business and IT
alignment with SEAM. Proc. of the 1st International Work-
shop on Requirements Engineering for Business Need, and IT
Alignment, 2005: 74–84.
[15] SAAT J, FRANKE U, LAGERSTROM R, et al. Enterprise ar-
chitecture meta models for IT/business alignment situations.
Proc. of the 14th IEEE International Enterprise Distributed
Object Computing Conference, 2010: 14–23.
[16] MALTA P, SOUSA R D. Process oriented approaches in en-
terprise architecture for business-IT alignment. Procedia Com-
puter Science, 2016, 100: 888–893.
[17] HENDERSON J C, VENKATRAMAN H. Strategic align-
ment: leveraging information technology for transforming or-
ganizations. IBM Systems Journal, 1993, 32(1): 472–484.
[18] ZACHMAN J. The Zachman framework for enterprise archi-
tecture. CA Magazine, 2003, 128(9): 15–22.
[19] HINKELMANN K, PASQUINI A A. Supporting business and
IT alignment by modelingbusiness and IT strategy and itsrela-
tions toenterprise architecture. Proc. of the Enterprise Systems
Conference, 2014: 149–154.
[20] ORI D. Misalignment symptom analysis based on enterprise
architecture model assessment. https://www.researchgate.net/
publication/318239729 Misalignment symptom analysis bas-
ed on enterprise architecture model assessment.
[21] ZHANG M M, CHEN H H, LUO A M. A systematic review
of business-IT alignment research with enterprise architecture.
IEEE Access, 2018, 6: 18933–18944.
[22] PEREIRA C M, BRANCOE C. Business and information sys-
tems alignment: understanding the key issues. http://citeseerx.
ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download;jsessionid=3506D73C5952B4-
CD190D99F1F1CA0F9E?doi=10.1.1.129.5080&rep=rep1&-
type=pdf.
[23] SOUSA P, PEREIRA C, MARQUES J. Enterprise architec-
ture alignment heuristics. Microsoft Architects Journal, 2004,
4: 34–39.
[24] CARVALHO G, SOUSA P. Using a medical sciences perspec-
tive to harness business and information systems misalign-
ment. Proc. of the 16th European Conference on Information
Systems, 2008: 2496–2507.
[25] CARVALHO R, SOUSA P. Business and information sys-
tems MisAlignment model: an holistic model leveraged on
misalignment and medical sciences approaches. http://ceur-
ws.org/Vol-336/paper8.pdf.
[26] KANG D, LEE J, KIM K. Alignment of business enterprise
architectures using fact-based ontologies. Expert Systems with
Applications, 2010, 37(4): 3274–3283.
[27] WAGTER R, PROPER H A, WITTE D. Enterprise coher-
ence assessment version. Proc. of the Working Conference on
Practice-Driven Research on Enterprise Transformation, 2011:
28–52.
[28] TAPIA R S, DANEVA M, VAN ECK P. Validating adequacy
and suitability of business-IT alignment criteria in an inter-
enterprise maturity model 202. Proc. of the 11th IEEE Inter-
national Enterprise DistributedObject Computing Conference,
2007: 202–213.
[29] PLAZAOLA L, SILVA E, VARGAS N, et al. A metamodel
for strategic business and IT alignment assessment. http://
www.asdifec.uni.edu.ni/Sitio/NormanVargas/187-Plazaola-A-
%20METAMODEL%20FOR%20STRATEGIC%20BUSINE-
SS%20AND%20IT%20ALIGNMENT%20ASSESMENT.pdf.
[30] PLAZAOLA L, FLORES J, SILVA E, et al. An approach to
associate strategic business-IT alignment assessment to enter-
prise architecture. Proc. of the 5th Conference on Systems En-
gineering, 2007: 1–10.
[31] PLAZAOLA L, FLORES J, VARGAS N, et al. Strategic busi-
ness and IT alignment assessment: a case study applying
an enterprise architecture-based metamodel. Proc. of the 41st
IEEE Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences,
2008: 398–398.
[32] ELHARI K, BOUNABAT B. Platform for assessing strate-
gic alignment using enterprise architecture: applica-
tion to e-government process assessment. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1104.1132. 2011.
[33] CLARK T, BARN B. A model-based approach to align-
ing business goals with enterprise architecture. Progressions
and Innovations in Model-driven Software Engineering, 2013:
252–253.

--- PAGE 14 ---
108 Journal of Systems Engineering and Electronics Vol. 31, No. 1, February 2020
[34] VASCONCELOS A, SOUSA P, TRIBOLET J. Enterprise
architecture analysis-an information system evaluation ap-
proach. Enterprise Modelling and Information Systems Archi-
tectures, 2015, 3(2): 31–53.
[35] LUFTMAN J. Assessing business-IT alignment maturity.
Strategies for Information Technology Governance, 2004, 4:
99.
[36] LUFTMAN J, KEMPAIAH R. An update on business-IT
alignment: “a line” has been drawn. MIS Quarterly Executive,
2007, 6(3): 165–175.
[37] LUFTMAN J. Handbook on business process management.
Berlin: Springer, 2015.
[38] LUFTMAN J, LYYTINEN K, BEN ZVI T. Enhancing the
measurement of information technology (IT) business align-
ment and its influence on company performance. Journal of
Information Technology, 2017, 32(1): 26–46.
[39] MUÑOZ L, AVILA O. Business and information technology
alignment measurement —a recent literature review. Proc. of
the International Conference on Business Information Sys-
tems, 2018: 112–123.
[40] MCADAM R, BITITCI U, GALBRAITH B. Technology
alignment and business strategy: a performance measurement
and dynamic capability perspective. International Journal of
Production Research, 2017, 55(23): 7168–7186.
[41] DE HAES S, VAN GREMBERGEN W. An exploratory study
into IT governance implementations and its impact on busi-
ness/IT alignment. Information Systems Management, 2009,
26(2): 123–137.
[42] CHEN L. Business-IT alignment maturity of companies in
China. Information & Management, 2010, 47(1): 9–16.
[43] ULLAH A, LAI R. A systematic review of business and infor-
mation technology alignment. ACM Transactions on Manage-
ment Information Systems, 2013, 4(1): 1–30.
[44] Architecture Working Group of the Software Engineering
Committee. Recommended practice for architectural descrip-
tion of software intensive systems. New York: IEEE Standards
Department, 2000.
[45] The Open Group. TOGAF “Enterprise Edition” Version 8.1.
New York: Publishing V H, 2003.
[46] DoD Architecture Framework Working Group. DoD Architec-
ture Framework Version 2.0. Washington D. C.: Department
of Defense, 2009.
[47] BIGGS B. Ministry of defence architectural framework
(MODAF). IET Digital Library, 2005, 62(3): 311–321.
[48] CHAROENSUK S, WONGSURAWAT W, KHANG D B.
Business-IT alignment: a practical research approach. The
Journal of High Technology Management Research, 2014,
25(2): 132–147.
[49] IACOB M E, MEERTENS L O, JONKERS H, et al. From en-
terprise architecture to business models and back. Software &
Systems Modeling, 2014, 13(3): 1059–1083.
Biographies
ZHANG Mengmeng was born in 1990. He re-
ceived his M.S. degree in management science and
technology from National University of Defense
Technology (NUDT), Changsha, China, in 2011. He
is pursuing his Ph.D. degree in the School of Infor-
mation System and Management at NUDT. He was
a visiting student in Case Western Reserve Univer-
sity. His research interests include information sys-
tem architecture design, analysis and validation.
E-mail: 186703816365@163.com
CHEN Honghui was born in 1969. He received his
M.S. degree and Ph.D. degree from NUDT. He is a
professor and the executive vice director of Science
and Technology on Information Systems Engineer-
ing Laboratory in NUDT now. His current research
interests include requirement engineering, military
information system, enterprise architecture design
and analysis.
E-mail: chh0808@gmail.com
MAO Yi was born in 1985. He received his Ph.D.
degree inNanjing University of Aeronautics and As-
tronautics. He is an engineer in State Key Labora-
tory of Air Traffic Management System and Tech-
nology, China. His research interests include trans-
portation planning and management, information
system architecture.
E-mail: mao y@nuaa.edu.cn
LUO Aimin was born in 1971. She received her
M.S. degree and Ph.D. degree from NUDT. She is
a professor in NUDT now. Her current research in-
terests include requirement engineering, military in-
formation system, enterprise architecture design and
analysis.
E-mail: amluo@nudt.edu.cn