--- PAGE 1 ---
Academic Editor:
Haridimos Kondylakis
Received: 29 July 2025
Revised: 7 October 2025
Accepted: 16 October 2025
Published: 22 October 2025
Citation: Zorrilla, M.; Yebenes,J.
Architecture Building Blocks forData
Governance in Data Spaces.
Information2025,16, 927. https://
doi.org/10.3390/info16110927
Copyright: © 2025 by the authors.
LicenseeMDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
Thisarticle is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license
(https://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/4.0/).
Article
Architecture Building Blocks for Data Governance in
Data Spaces
Marta Zorrilla * and Juan Yebenes
Departamento de Ingeniería Informática y Electrónica, Facultad de Ciencias, Universidad de Cantabria,
Santander, 39005 Cantabria, Spain; juan.yebenes@unican.es
* Correspondence: marta.zorrilla@unican.es
Abstract
The growing importance of data as a driver of the digital economy is promoting the creation
of data spaces for the secure and controlled exchange of data between organizations. Data
governance is emerging as an essential pillar to ensure efficient, ethical and transparent
access and use of data in these ecosystems. The article reviews the state of the art to identify
the specific requirements that data governance must address in data spaces and proposes a
reference enterprise architecture to facilitate the design, development and implementation
of a data governance system for a data space scenario. The proposed framework has already
beenformallydefinedandvalidatedinthecontextofIndustry4.0, andisnowadaptedtothe
particular characteristics and needs of data spaces. This architecture focuses on key aspects
of data governance in data spaces, such as new requirements, principles, organization,
roles and responsibilities, and data quality, security and metadata management, as well
as the data lifecycle in the data space. This research contributes to guiding data space
government bodies to formalize data strategies and high-level governance principles in
concrete architectural components that establish the capacities to be implemented within
the data ecosystem. To support practical adoption, this work also provides clarifying
examples of different blocks of architecture.
Keywords: data governance; data spaces; reference architecture; digital economy
1. Introduction
Data has emerged as the pivotal force within the digital economy, functioning as the
most valuable strategic resource for business transformation and competitiveness [1]. In an
era marked by continual technological advancement, the capacity to manage, analyze, and
govern extensive volumes of data drives innovation and empowers organizations to adapt
to an increasingly data-driven marketplace. Acknowledging this reality, Europe is taking
the lead in establishing data spaces (DSs) that facilitate the secure and controlled exchange
of data in public and private entities, thereby promoting cross-sector collaboration and
generating added value [2].
The concept of data space (DS) is relatively new, and various definitions can be found
within the literature. A. Reiberg et al. [2] define a DS as “a federated, open infrastructure
for sovereign data sharing based on common policies, rules, and standards”. The Data
Spaces Support Centre [3] describes it as “an interoperable framework, based on common
governance principles, standards, practices and enabling services, that enables trusted data
transactions between participants”. The International Data Spaces Association (IDSA) [4]
characterizes a DS as “a decentralized infrastructure for trustworthy data sharing and
Information 2025, 16, 927 https://doi.org/10.3390/info16110927

--- PAGE 2 ---
Information 2025, 16, 927 2 of 32
exchange in data ecosystems based on commonly agreed principles”. Finally, the Spanish
Data Office [5] defines it as “an ecosystem where participants voluntarily share data in an
environment of sovereignty, trust, and security, established through integrated governance,
legal, organizational, regulatory, and technological mechanisms”. In summary, a DS is
primarily characterized by members sharing and exchanging data within an environment
of mutual trust, which occurs under the principles of sovereignty and decentralization,
within an interoperable framework, guided by commonly agreed principles, standards,
policies, and rules. This leads to the need for governance mechanisms to ensure the rights
of participants and the fluent exchange of data [2] as well as to regulate the activities of
participants within the ecosystem [6].
R. Braun et al. [7] note that DS governance involves “managing how the data space
is accessed, controlled and used; assessing and controlling the generation of value from
the data space and the redistribution of value among actors; reflecting and participating in
decision making about the data space (who can make those decisions) and influencing how
data and virtual space is accessed, controlled, used and benefited from”.
On the other hand, the IDSA-RAM architecture [8] points out that DS governance
“defines the roles, functions, and processes of DS from a governance and compliance
perspective. In doing so, it defines the requirements that the business ecosystem must
meet to achieve secure and reliable enterprise interoperability” and addresses this issue
in a federated manner by distributing decision rights for governance and management
activities among the different roles in the DS ecosystem [9]. Governance also “encompasses
relationships with stakeholders and how their interests and concerns are articulated and
taken into account” [10]. Finally, the Spanish Data Office [5] points out that the governance
of a DS should allow for policies on access and use of data resources to be enshrined in the
DS, for the use of data to be subject to external audit, for conflict resolution mechanisms to
be put in place, and for transparency on the level of quality of data provided by participants
to be ensured.
The complexity of these ecosystems, as pointed out by Fritzenkötter et al. [11], may
require different levels of governance in a DS as part of a governance continuum. At a high
level, a governance structure is needed for defining strategies and managing stakeholder
interests. For other, more specific aspects, concrete governance structures may be needed,
such as the establishment of standards and rules, as well as the management of asset
interoperability. Between these levels, an oversight function must be defined to deliver
transparency and accountability, which would include establishing roles and processes that
allow recourse to the governing body if any stakeholder feels that those responsible for the
DS have not fairly respected their needs.
Data governance (DG) within the DS governance, on the other hand, aims to enable
and establish the necessary capabilities to exercise consensual and communicated decision-
making, authority, and control over the management of data assets, and to define who has
decision-making rights and responsibilities for data-related processes within DS [12]. It
therefore focuses on how data that is shared and used within the DS is managed. According
to [10], DG turns out to be a fundamental discipline for the proper functioning of DS.
The DG system is shaped by the DS activities, objectives, standards, and purpose [13],
ensuring that data is managed as a strategic asset. To be effective, the DG system must
coordinate people, processes, and technologies [14] and include all DS members [15]. It also
needs to define the scope of decision-making for data governance, identifying which data
activities and aspects should be governed, as well as clarifying the roles, rights, authority,
and responsibilities of those involved [16].
Although the objectives pursued by DG in general remain common to other environ-
ments, in the case of DS, it is also necessary to take into account the changes that this new

--- PAGE 3 ---
Information 2025, 16, 927 3 of 32
model entails, in terms of data, participants, and processes, as well as legal, regulatory,
administrative, or economic aspects. In addition, the technological platform to use to make
DG viable in these environments must also be considered [17].
Even though we have found references that address DG in the context of DS, the docu-
mentation analyzed does not provide guidance on how to develop the necessary structure
for its implementation. To address this gap, we propose the TRENTI DG framework [18–20],
whose aim is to solve the “translation problem”: how to transform data strategies and high-
level governance principles into tangible architectural components that can be designed,
deployed, and maintained within a DS. The TRENTI framework was conceived precisely
to address this gap. TRENTI is not merely a catalog of governance principles or procedures;
it is a reference architecture that connects governance requirements with the enterprise
architecture design through a modular and adaptable structure. The core contribution of
this paper is the adaptation of TRENTI’s Architecture Building Blocks (ABBs) to support
the implementation of DG in DSs, based on newly identified requirements specific to this
context. In particular, the following ABBs have been adapted: principles, organization,
roles and responsibilities, data quality, security and metadata management, and the data
lifecycle. For ease of understanding, several ABBs related to DS are instantiated. These
ABBs have been chosen based on considerations and documentation from the organizations
involved in European DSs initiatives.
The paper is structured as follows: After this introduction, Section 2 describes the
method followed in this research. Section 3 presents the state of the art regarding data
governance and data management in DS. Section 4 contextualizes data governance and
identifies the requirements that the governance framework must address, which are condi-
tioned by the specific characteristics of DS. Section 5 describes the reference architecture to
support the implementation of data governance in DS. Section 6 discusses challenges and
barriers that hinder the deployment of DS, as identified in the recent literature, and how
the TRENTI DG framework can contribute to overcoming them. Finally, Section 7 draws
the conclusions and contributions of this work and suggests future lines of research.
2. Method
This research adopts a common methodological approach in software engineering,
aimed at designing and specifying a reference enterprise architecture for data governance
in data spaces. The process began with the formalization of the problem, identifying the
lack of structured guidance for implementing DG systems in DS environments. A thorough
literature review was conducted, encompassing both academic sources and European initia-
tives (e.g., IDSA, GAIA-X, BDVA), to extract relevant concepts and requirements. Based on
this analysis, we propose a solution derived from a framework originally developed for DG
in Industry 4.0 [18], which has now been adapted and particularized to meet the specific
needs and characteristics of DS. This framework includes a modular architecture composed
of ABBs, each addressing distinct governance requirements. The ABBs are described and
formally instantiated using different artifacts such as catalogs, matrices, and diagrams to
facilitate reuse and alignment with data strategies boosted by the DS governance body.
3. Related Works
In this section, we review the existing literature and initiatives related to DS and
DG to understand how the development of DG is approached in DSs and identify those
characteristics that may affect or condition the development and deployment of DG, as
well as the requirements to be fulfilled.

--- PAGE 4 ---
Information 2025, 16, 927 4 of 32
3.1. DS Features
In terms of the key factors that characterize a data space, data sharing is the most
prominent [2]. Data sharing means enabling access and facilitating the exchange of data [5].
However, for this to happen, it is necessary to build trust between participants in the
DS [21,22]. This means laying the groundwork to regulate the exchange or sharing of
data and defining the conditions under which it takes place, through the formulation of
appropriate agreements or contracts [23] so that an environment of trust is created between
the members.
Owners’ sovereignty over their data is another fundamental aspect of DS [24].
Sovereignty refers to an owner’s ability to make decisions about their data [25] and to
exercise control over that data and its use, even when shared with third parties [4]. To
implement data sovereignty, data must be accompanied by metadata that unambiguously
defines the restrictions on data use at each step of the information value chain [8]. Accord-
ing to IDSA, this can be ensured through (i) decentralization of data, which remains with
the data owner and is not integrated into a common dataset, (ii) a precisely graded certifi-
cation concept according to the profile of each participant (as much security as necessary),
and (iii) security of infrastructures through new technological solutions and established
security policies and functions.
In DS, the terms ‘federated’ and ‘interoperable’ go hand in hand. Interoperability is a
fundamental aspect and must exist at different levels in DS [26] to enable its constituents
to access or exchange data efficiently. There must be technical interoperability in terms of
the physical connection between DSs, the APIs and protocols that enable communication
between systems, and the data formats that must be supported homogeneously. There
must also be conceptual or semantic interoperability so that both the data provider and
the data consumer have the same interpretation of the meaning of the shared data, and
organizational interoperability [27], which involves a common DG. This entails identifying
the stakeholders involved in the management, provision and use of the data and the rela-
tionships between them and ensuring that the participants in the data exchange or sharing
are aligned on the principles, guidelines, policies and rules governing the management of
the shared data, especially with regard to quality, security and its life cycle, as well as the
management of the metadata necessary for the operation of the DS. In relation to the latter,
tools such as data catalogs, data glossaries, and labelling systems, among others, help to
organize and facilitate access to information in a consistent manner. It is also important
to highlight that, in order to facilitate interoperability, it is necessary to establish common
standards at all levels, which must be assumed by all members of the DS, in addition to
compliance with the current legislation.
3.2. Data Governance in Data Spaces
A common feature of DSs is the existence of governance mechanisms that protect
the rights of participants and ensure the seamless exchange of data. These governance
mechanisms are based on international standards, national and supranational laws, or
rules and standards agreed upon by DS participants. DG must also be included as a crucial
aspect of DS governance, acknowledging it as a sub-function of corporate/organizational
governance [28]. However, to date, data space governance is scarcely researched [29]. For
this reason, we have analyzed how this discipline is addressed in the context of DS. First,
the contributions of European initiatives are considered. Next, contributions from the
academic arena are analyzed.
Data governance plays a central role in the reference architecture proposed by the
IDSA-RAM model [9], serving as a facilitator for the proper integration of an organiza-
tion into a collaborative ecosystem such as a DS. The IDSA-RAM framework specifies

--- PAGE 5 ---
Information 2025, 16, 927 5 of 32
decision rights and processes for the definition, creation, processing and use of data. It
takes a federated approach to the DG and introduces new roles to which decision rights
for data governance and management activities are assigned. These roles include data
owner, data provider, data consumer, broker, service provider, clearing house and app
store. Responsibilities for these roles are assigned through an RACI matrix covering data
management, metadata management, and the data lifecycle activities. The model also
allows us to define the required standards, control, and compliance rules for data exchange
between the different participants, specifying its components and mechanisms [30].
For GAIA-X, DG is also one of its fundamental pillars. Its goal is to ensure that data is
handled ethically, securely, and in compliance with applicable regulations while respecting
the sovereignty and privacy of data owners. To achieve this, GAIA-X relies on a set of key
components outlined in the Gaia-X European Association for Data and Cloud AISBL (2024)
report [31]. These include policies that define how data can be accessed and used within
the DS, along with specific restrictions based on data types (e.g., sensitive, personal, or
business data), as well as mechanisms to revoke permissions if conditions change. Another
essential component is the use of standardized digital contracts, which outline the terms
and conditions of data exchange, including clauses on privacy, permissible usage periods,
and other constraints. Furthermore, all participants and services within the DS must be
certified to ensure compliance with governance rules in the GAIA-X framework, including
technical and legal verifications. A key feature is the federated catalog, which enables the
registration of services and data, including metadata that specifies access policies, usage
requirements, and licensing terms. Finally, identity and permission management ensure
that DS participants have verified digital identities, establishing their legitimacy within
the ecosystem. Access control systems ensure that only authorized entities can access
the data. However, GAIA-X does not provide a specific architecture for implementing
data governance.
The Big Data Value Association (BDVA) addresses data governance in data spaces
throughinitiativesfocusedoninteroperability, security, andrespectingdatasovereignty[32].
Its approach aligns with the European Data Strategy and involves close collaboration with
initiatives like GAIA-X and IDSA to define standards and create common governance
frameworks that ensure trustworthy and equitable data exchanges across data spaces. In
contrast, FIWARE does not propose a specific solution for data governance but provides
tools and solutions for interoperability and data sovereignty, where governance is implic-
itly addressed. These four organizations (IDSA, GAIA-X, FIWARE BDVA) have joined
forces in the Data Spaces Business Alliance (DSBA) “with the common goal of accelerating
business transformation in the data economy”. In this regard, DSBA does not define either
a specific architecture for data governance. However, the principles, standards, and tools it
proposes constitute a robust framework to support the development of data governance in
such environments.
Among the academic references, Torre-Bastida et al. [17] analyze the technological
perspective of DG in data ecosystems (DSs). They suggest that, while traditional DG
frameworks must evolve as current models are insufficient for complex DS scenarios,
key elements of DG remain, such as defining clear objectives and addressing DG imple-
mentation from two perspectives: organizational (involving data, participants, processes,
and regulatory domains) and technological (platforms enabling DG). However, DSs in-
troduce new DG considerations, such as data sovereignty, quality, trust, and security.
They also identify three levels of DG—micro (intraorganizational), meso (interorganiza-
tional), and macro (legislative)—and highlight challenges like ensuring data use control
after sharing, supporting the principle of sovereignty, and the need for data catalogs for
metadata management.

--- PAGE 6 ---
Information 2025, 16, 927 6 of 32
K. Suzuki and D. Yokozeki [23] propose several requirements for DG implementation,
including managing dispersed data; ensuring interoperability across DS; mechanisms for
discovering participants and data; governance of encryption-based data storage and data
transmission; encrypted data processing; and processing platform/location governance
to allow data owners to control over where and how their data are stored, processed,
and distributed.
S. Cuno et al. [33] highlight the requirement for an appropriate organization that
controls the data and pays special attention to the needs of the members of the DS. They
also emphasize the need for clear roles and responsibilities for decision-making about data
quality, access, and lifecycle management in Urban DS. They propose roles such as data
committee, governance officer, data owner, data steward, and technology steward.
E. Curry [34] calls for research on decentralized DG models that support collaboration
while considering the ethical, legal, and privacy interests of stakeholders. DG in ecosys-
tems must acknowledge ownership, sovereignty, and data regulation while supporting
sustainable economic models.
Datos.gob.es [35] underscores that DSs require collaboration among multiple organi-
zations to establish a common vision on key strategic and operational aspects, legislation,
standards, and governance models.
Data Spaces Support Centre [36] outlines the role of governance authorities in estab-
lishing rules and standards for secure, interoperable, and observable data transactions,
operationalizing governance across the DS. This requires a central governing body for the
entire DS.
Finally, M. Minghini et al. [10] point out that “Data governance within a common
European data space should set out a framework outlining clear roles, duties, standards
and responsibilities, to ensure that data is appropriately protected, while also supporting
data sharing and openness to data mobility”.
In short, DG in DSs is essential for enabling secure, interoperable, and collaborative
data ecosystems. Frameworks such as IDSA-RAM and GAIA-X emphasize federated
models, standardized roles, and ethical data handling. Academic research complements
these efforts by highlighting the need for clear objectives, decentralized governance, and
addressing challenges such as data quality, transparency, and security. Also, they point out
that collaborative approaches and common standards are crucial to maintaining consistency
across organizations while supporting data mobility and economic value creation. All of
this requires a common DG framework outlining clear roles, duties, responsibilities and
standards, as well as policies and processes to ensure that data are properly governed
and managed in the DS. However, to our knowledge, there is no framework to guide the
construction of an enterprise architecture for implementing DG in DSs.
4. Requirements for Data Governance in Data Spaces
A governance system must fulfil a variety of requirements, which involve both evolv-
ing current capabilities and incorporating new ones. These requirements can be orga-
nizational, process-oriented, or technology-related. Therefore, as a preliminary step in
developing a Reference Enterprise Architecture for DG, it is crucial to establish the require-
ments of the DG system within a DS. This will highlight the basic needs that the architecture
must address.
The requirements can be categorized into general ones, that means applicable to any
DG system, and those specific to DG systems in DSs. Among the general requirements, it is
essential to establish principles, as outlined by [4], that guide the conduct, behavior, and
philosophy of the DS and its members regarding the use, management, and governance of
the exchanged or shared data [37].

--- PAGE 7 ---
Information 2025, 16, 927 7 of 32
While each member participating in the DS may have its own data strategy, the DS
itself should define a set of objectives related to data exchange and sharing, along with
an overarching data strategy specific to the DS. Governance bodies for the DS need to be
established, along with defined roles and governed entities. Decision rights, authority, and
responsibilities over data assets need to be assigned to the defined roles [8,33].
A DG model must be established and should be based on the functions of Evaluate,
Direct, and Monitor [38]. Also, data-related activities subject to governance must be
identified [39]. These activities will form the data lifecycle (DLC), which, in the context of
theDS,couldbeexpandedtoincludeCollect, Store, Process, Transmit, Exchange/Distribute,
Use, and Destroy [40]. Furthermore, it is essential to determine the specific aspects of data
to be governed for these DLC activities [41] (see Appendix A). Taking a data lifecycle
approach to data governance is helpful because it allows for a thorough analysis of how
data should be overseen at various stages, as well as how to create value from data use and
reuse in a safe and equitable manner [42].
Additionally, standards, policies and rules must be established for DLC activities to
manage data access and usage for participants, aligned with the various roles they may
perform within the ecosystem [10], specifically addressing aspects of data sharing and
usage, such as quality, security, and metadata. This includes transforming data to provide
structure and format based on its intended use.
The organizational model for DG within the DS must be defined, whether it is central-
ized, federated, or otherwise [12]. Additionally, the extension of the DG system across the
entire information value chain for the exchanged or shared data must be considered, which
will involve signing agreements between DS participants [43]. Appropriate organizational
structures, functions, and processes must be established to develop the strategies and
policies defined for DG.
Emphasis should be placed on organizational and semantic/conceptual interoper-
ability for data exchange, sharing, and exploitation. This includes developing a common
language and reference model to manage the diversity of data and their relationships.
Examples of this include creating business glossaries, data dictionaries, and data catalogs,
along with implementing policies and processes for their management. Such initiatives
enhance comprehension of the context, relevance, and associations among shared data.
Semantic validation must be performed “ex ante,” or before sharing the data, and “ex post,”
or at the time of receiving the data. The goal is to ensure that the data meets the promised
or expected quality standards.
Another critical element of a DG system within DS frameworks is establishing guide-
lines for collecting the metadata needed to track data usage, as well as for defining security
and regulatory classifications at both the data element and data set levels. Processes must
also be defined to analyze the impact of any changes made to data elements. Furthermore,
it is important to explore federated metadata management models within the DS, while also
automating processes for metadata search, capture, interpretation, and enrichment. The
integration of advanced techniques, including machine learning and artificial intelligence,
into metadata cataloging and classification can significantly enhance these processes.
To ensure high data quality, it is imperative to establish comprehensive policies, stan-
dards, and processes. This involves identifying the criteria for measuring data quality,
which may include accuracy, reliability, integrity, timeliness, etc., and defining correspond-
ing quality rules. Moreover, mechanisms must be in place to assess and report on the
quality level of the data contributed by participants [44]. Additionally, it is essential to
implement processes for automatic, continuous, and real-time evaluation and validation of
data quality at each stage of DLC. These processes should be capable of issuing real-time
alerts and, when necessary, automatically correcting any identified issues.

--- PAGE 8 ---
Information 2025, 16, 927 8 of 32
Sensitive data must be identified, and appropriate security classifications should be
established, taking into account usage conditions, relevant regulations, standards, and
legislation. Agreements between parties should explicitly define policies that outline
permissible actions with the data, designate who is authorized to perform those actions,
and specify the terms and conditions based on the data classification. Such policies are
designed to maintain the confidentiality, integrity, and high availability of shared data at
all times. Additionally, robust mechanisms must be implemented to ensure the validation
and authentication of both data providers and consumers.
Policies, processes, and a system of measures and Key Performance Indicators (KPIs)
must be defined to monitor the performance of data usage within the DS. These measures
should ensure that data-related strategies are being properly executed and that data usage
and management are aligned with established agreements and policies. The monitoring
process should encompass three categories of metrics: those assessing the maturity level
of processes, those measuring the performance of processes within data management
(DM) frameworks, and those evaluating data governance (DG) elements, such as policies,
principles, and organizational structures.
In addition to the general requirements that are common to any decentralized gov-
ernance system, the DG system within DSs must be capable of managing dispersed and
distributeddatawhilefacilitatingdatasharingandexchangeamongparticipants. Therefore,
it must adhere to the principles of trust, data sovereignty, transparency, interoperability,
and legal and ethical compliance [45]. From this perspective, a DG authority for the data
space must be established.
Furthermore, DSs must define agreements or contracts that regulate data sharing and
exchange, specifying the conditions under which these activities will take place [23]. These
agreements should outline the responsibilities and acceptable uses of shared data. Sharing
and usage agreements must also describe applicable policies for various data lifecycle
phases, including those related to the final destruction of data. These contracts and policies
should be attached as metadata to the shared data and must be software-readable (termed
self-aware contracts) to enable digital management. The data owner and/or the governance
body of the DS should have the ability to audit the actual usage of their data and verify
compliance with the agreed-upon terms.
Additionally, shared data assets and their usage restrictions, the employed data struc-
tures, vocabularies, taxonomies, and the technical means of access must be sufficiently
described and made accessible to participants in the DS. Mechanisms should be placed to
facilitate the discovery and availability of this information. This description should utilize
standards and/or commonly agreed-upon criteria.
In the next section, we describe a reference enterprise architecture for DG that provides
ABBs that satisfy these requirements with explanatory examples based on considerations
and documentation from the organizations involved in European DSs initiatives.
5. Reference Enterprise Architecture to Deploy DG in DS
The TRENTI DG framework [18–20] consists of a reference architecture for represent-
ing the DG system, a method outlining the steps for architecture deployment, a list of
adopted standards, and a maturity model. Together, these components enable the creation
of DG systems aligned with the organization’s data strategy. Although the framework was
developed for Industry 4.0, its core is general and can be used in any sector. Likewise, the
international standards on which it is based are those commonly used in organizations such
as TOGAF® Standard [37], Reusable Asset Specification [46], ISO 38505 [38], ISO 8000 [47],
etc., so its implementation is not a disruptive process.

--- PAGE 9 ---
Information 2025, 16, 927 9 of 32
The reference architecture consists of a series of Architecture Building Blocks (ABBs)
(see Figure 1). Each of them specifies a functionality and capabilities that the architecture
must implement. It translates abstract principles into actionable routines and structures [48].
Table 1 provides a brief description of each ABB in the reference model, as well as the
adaptations made to each ABB for the DS context. Table 2 gathers the tasks that arise
from the requirements for the DG in DSs described in Section 4 and the ABBs of the
architecture that implement them. These elements are described across three architectural
layers: business, information systems, and technology. In this paper, the artifacts are
defined at the business level, leaving the selection and implementation of specific technical
mechanisms to the DS governing body or whoever it delegates. This approach allows
each DS to choose the most suitable tools and solutions according to its maturity level,
regulatory constraints, and interoperability requirements. For example, a DS may opt to
begin with a basic identity verification solution and later migrate to a more advanced one
as its needs evolve. Appendix B presents a table listing the ABBs, the artifacts offered by
Trenti for their development, and the tools that help develop these artifacts.
Figure 1. ABB reference model represented using Achimate® notation [49].

--- PAGE 10 ---
Information 2025, 16, 927 10 of 32
Table 1. Brief description of the ABBs.
ABB Description
PRINCIPLES GROUP
Principle
Specifies the enterprise architecture for the definition, cataloging, and management of a set
of principles that guide DG. This ABB has been extended with principles specific to DSs,
such as Sharing, Trust, Sovereignty, and Interoperability.
GOVERNANCE GROUP
DG strategic alignment
Defines the enterprise architecture required to identify the information needs based on the
DS objectives. This ABB has been extended to translate information needs into specific data
requests for data providers within DS. Additionally, it defines the goals of DG in DS,
ensuring they align with the DS overall strategy.
Stewardship
This ABB consists of three building blocks: (i) Roles and Responsibilities ABB, which
establishes the enterprise architecture required for the definition of the DS-specific roles
(data owner, data provider, data user, data consumer, etc.), their responsibilities, and
decision-making rights. (ii) Policies and Standards ABB, which facilitates the transition
from principles to the development of concrete policies and standards. (iii) Governance
Model ABB, which defines a governance model centered on the key functions: Evaluate,
Direct, and Monitor (EDM).
Organization
Specifies the enterprise architecture that helps define DS governing bodies, the bodies that
are governed, and the organizational model of the DS governance.
MANAGEMENT GROUP
Metadata management
Determines the enterprise architecture that implements DG system requirements to
address data semantics, data representation, and the registration of data element
descriptions, along with the management of metadata, which must include metadata about
the quality of the data exchanged in the DS.
Data quality
Specifies the enterprise architecture for planning, development, and execution of data
quality policies.
Data security, privacy
and risk
Stipulates the enterprise architecture required to support the planning, development, and
implementation of security and data protection policies, considering DS requirements,
applicable legislation, and contractual obligations as defined in the data contracts signed
between DS users.
DLC activities
Develops the enterprise architecture required to identify data-related activities and the
specific aspects of data that are subject to governance in the DS. This ABB is further
decomposed into several sub-blocks, each corresponding to a specific phase of the data
lifecycle (Collect, Store, Process, Transmit, Exchange/Distribute, Use, and Destroy) where
roles and responsibilities for these activities will be established and KPIs defined to
measure their performance.
CONTROL GROUP
Supervision, monitoring
and evaluation
Specifies the enterprise architecture that enables the definition and management of KPIs,
processes, and resources needed to monitor, measure, analyze, and report on the
effectiveness and performance of the DG system.

--- PAGE 11 ---
Information 2025, 16, 927 11 of 32
Table 2. Tasks required to implement a DG system for DSs.
Task Responsible ABB
Define principles guiding the conduct, behavior, and philosophy of the DS and
its members regarding data usage, management, and governance.
ABB. Principles
Establish a DG plan for the DS, defining goals, objectives, and strategies
aligned with DS objectives.
ABB. Strategic Alignment
Create a DG authority for the DS, identifying relevant actors and governance
bodies. In DSs, this authority is part of the DS governing body.
ABB. Organization
Develop a federated model for governing dispersed and distributed data. ABB. Organization
Ensure DS members commit to complying with the established DG system. ABB. Organization
Define roles, responsibilities, and decision rights, assigning specific activities
and ensuring alignment with frameworks like IDSA-RAM.
ABB. Roles, Responsibilities, and
Decision Rights
Formulate agreements/contracts to regulate data sharing and exchange,
considering standards and applicable legislation.
ABB. Policies and Standards.
ABB Exchange/Distribute
Enable the establishment and management of software-readable
agreements/contracts.
ABB. Policies and Standards.
ABB Exchange/Distribute
Attach metadata to shared data to explicitly define usage conditions and ensure
compliance, including metadata on data quality.
ABB. Metadata
Implement mechanisms allowing the data owner or DS governance body to
audit the actual usage of shared data as well as the ethical handling of data.
ABB. Roles, Responsibilities, and
Decision Rights; ABB. Supervision,
monitoring & evaluation
Define parameters and processes for evaluating the quality of shared data.
Quality validation must be performed “ex ante,” or before sharing the data,
and “ex post,” or at the time of receiving the data. The goal is to ensure that the
data meets the promised or expected quality standards.
ABB. Quality Management
Provide directories and catalogs to enable the discovery and access to
information about DS participants and available data assets.
ABB. Metadata
Facilitate semantic or conceptual interoperability by selecting standards and
describing vocabularies, taxonomies and ontologies.
ABB. Metadata
Establish security classifications for sensitive data and define policies for use in
contracts, ensuring confidentiality, integrity, availability, and authentication of
participants.
ABB. Data security and risks
Define KPIs to measure the fulfillment of the data governance program
ABB. Supervision, monitoring &
evaluation
To formally specify, describe and manage reusable ABBs, we created ABB-profile
(see Figure 2), an extension of the “Default Profile” of the Reusable Asset Specifica-
tion (RAS), Version 2.2 [46]. standard and the ISO-42010:2011 [50] Systems and soft-
ware engineering—Architecture Description standard. ABB-profile is made up of the
following classes:

--- PAGE 12 ---
Information 2025, 16, 927 12 of 32
Figure 2. ABB_profile represented using UML® notation [51]. The elements that correspond to
the RAS standard are shaded in gray. Elements that correspond to the ISO-42010 standard are
shaded green.
Asset_(ABB). It defines the ABB. It contains three required attributes: Name, Id and
Description. It is composed of the following elements of the RAS standard default profile:
• Profile. It describes the reusable asset type and provides information about its lineage.
In this case, as stated above, it is an extension of the “Default Profile” of RAS.
• Classification. This class contains a set of descriptors to classify the ABB. Classification
allows the ABB to be managed and located in a repository.
• Solution. It describes the Solutions Building Blocks (SBBs), which will be instantiated
to implement the Governance System defined by the architecture. SBBs define the
specific products and components that contribute to implementing the functionality
and capabilities defined in the ABB.
• Usage. Depending on the level of detail of the ABB, this class describes the activities to
be performed for implementing or using the asset, so that it can guide the development
of SBBs.
• Related-asset. Exposes other related ABBs and the type of relationship (aggregation,
similarity, dependency, parent, composition).
• Requirement. It describes each requirement that ABB implements.
• Architecture-description. This class describes and communicates different parts of the
architecture defined by ABB, according to the ISO/IEC/IEEE 42010:2011 standard [50].
It is made up of the following classes:
− Stakeholder. It contains information about an individual, team, organization
or categories thereof, who has an interest in the DG system and for which the
Viewpoints are built.
− Concern. Describes aspects of the system that are of concern or interest to
some stakeholder.
− Viewpoint. It establishes the conventions for the construction, interpretation and
use of ABB architecture views to frame specific DG system concerns.
− Model type. This class establishes the modelling conventions for each type of
model, related to a viewpoint.

--- PAGE 13 ---
Information 2025, 16, 927 13 of 32
In order to demonstrate the application of the model for the creation and management
of ABBs, below we will use the above ABB_profile to describe some of the ABBs that
are part of a DG system in a DS. These ABBs have been chosen based on considerations
and documentation from the organizations involved in European DS initiatives. For the
graphical descriptions, we will use the ArchiMate® Enterprise Architecture modeling
language v3.1 standard.
5.1. ABB DS_Principles
As noted in the previous sections of this document, all participants in a DS must
adhere to common principles. Although the literature reviewed barely details specific DG
principles in the DS, we have found mentions of different types of principles related to the
DS, such as DS governance principles, DS design principles or principles of the Common
European Data Spaces. The concept “Principle” in our architecture should be understood
as a statement of intent that defines a fundamental norm or idea that guides thinking and
behavior in DS. Next, we will explain how an enterprise architecture would collect and
represent the principles related to DS, data and DG, without addressing the technological
aspects for its implementation. Later, we will instantiate some of these principles specific
to a DS.
To represent and manage DG principles in the DS, we have created the ABB
DS_Principles, which has the structure reflected in Figure 3 and whose description is
presented in Table 3.
Table 3. ABB DS_Principles.
Attribute Description
Name ABB DS_Principles
Description
This ABB makes it possible for the principles to be defined, cataloged and managed. The DS
Architecture Principles establish, in turn, high-level requirements that condition the architecture
process, affecting the design, development, maintenance and use of the DG architecture.
Requirement
The ABB contributes to the implementation of the following requirements: “Principles must be
established to guide the conduct, behavior and philosophy of the DS regarding the sharing, use,
governance and management of data.” And “DG principles must be aligned with and support DS
principles”.
Classification DG Principles; DS Principles; motivational elements; elements for decision-making.
Usage
It is used to record and manage the principles that guide the DG system, as well as a reference for
decision-making; to justify other system requirements and to demonstrate the coherence between
principles and the objectives and goals they support.
Related-asset
Name: Catalog management service.
Description: Service for catalog management. Allows you to register, modify and delete principles
in the catalog.
Related-asset
Name: Principles development process.
Description: Defines the sequence of activities to be carried out for the development and approval
of the principles.
Related-asset
Name: Principles catalog.
Description: Defines the data entity where the established principles are recorded.

--- PAGE 14 ---
Information 2025, 16, 927 14 of 32
Figure 3. ABB DS_Principles represented using Achimate® notation [49].
For space reasons, below we will only develop the grouping related-assets of this ABB
and the viewpoint principles catalog of the grouping architecture-description.
5.1.1. ABB DS_Principles. Grouping Related-Assets
This group (see Figure 4) implements the modules of the enterprise architecture
necessary to establish the principles in the DS. To make this possible, a process must be
established in the DS that executes the necessary activities to develop and approve the
principles that will govern the DS, as well as to identify those responsible for each activity
in the process. In addition, a data entity called the principles catalog was created to record
the defined principles resulting from the application of the process. It also implements
a business service that is responsible for managing the principles catalog. With all these
components, DS members can develop the enterprise structure that allows them to define
and manage the principles that guide DG in DS.

--- PAGE 15 ---
Information 2025, 16, 927 15 of 32
Figure 4. ABB DS_Principles. Related assets illustrated using Achimate® notation [49].
5.1.2. ABB DS_Principles. Grouping Architecture-Description
As shown in Figure 5, the architecture-description class in ABB DS_Principles is
composed of the viewpoints: principles catalog and diagram of alignment of the principles
with the goals and objectives of the DS.
Figure 5. ABB DS_Principles. Architecture description depicted using Achimate® notation [49].
Principles catalog viewpoint
The principles catalog viewpoint is described in Table 4 and presents to the governing
bodies and members of the DS, stakeholders of the DG system, how the principles should
be recorded so that they can be managed. This contributes to satisfying their interests and
concerns regarding the existence of common principles that guide data governance in the
DS, aligned with current legislation and the mission and data strategy of the DS.

--- PAGE 16 ---
Information 2025, 16, 927 16 of 32
Table 4. Principles catalog viewpoint description.
Attribute Description
Viewpoint
Name
Principles Catalog
Description
This catalog captures the DG Principles for the DS according to an agreed structure (see model type
in Table 5) that allows for their dissemination and management. A principle represents a statement
of intent that defines a fundamental norm or idea that guides thinking and behavior in DS.
Type Catalog
Stakeholders Governing bodies and members of the DS
Concerns DS mission, Strategic alignment, law enforcement
Table 5. Principle catalog model type description.
Attribute Description
Id Unique and exclusive identifier of the principle
Name name given to the principle
Category The following categories of principles apply: DS principles, DG principles
Owner Responsible for defining and managing the principle
Statement Statement that sets out the principle in an unequivocal, concise and clear manner
Rationale
Reasons justifying the principle, highlighting how it contributes to DS or DG objectives and
strategies, the benefits it brings to the business and the relationships with other principles,
including levels of priority or importance of some over others
Implication
Consequences of assuming or not assuming the principle. Exposition of the necessary requirements
to comply with the principle, in terms of resources, activities and costs
The model type describes the principle catalog structure (see Table 5).
The DG system includes three groups of principles: (i) DS principles, (ii) DG principles
and (iii) data principles. All of them are collected in Figure 6, where the DG principles are
general principles established from the ISO/IEC 38505-1 standard [52].
The catalog of principles will then be instantiated, using the model type exposed
in Table 5, to define only the principles that are specific to DS, such as sharing, trust,
sovereignty and interoperability (see Tables 6–9 below).
Table 6. Principle of sharing.
Attribute Content
Id DSDGP001
Name Sharing
Category DS principles
Owner Governance bodies
Statement
DG must contribute to enabling DS participants to provide and receive data with a high degree of
control, or to shape and contribute to this exchange.
Rationale
Data sharing can be considered as the most prominent principle, given that it is also the main
objective of DS. Data sharing is understood in the sense of enabling access and facilitating the
exchange of data, although it must be taken into account that data sharing does not necessarily
imply the transfer of data from one entity to another.
Implication Without this principle, the DS will not be able to operate.

--- PAGE 17 ---
Information 2025, 16, 927 17 of 32
Figure 6. Principles of the DG system in DS represented using Achimate® notation [49].
Table 7. Principle of trust.
Attribute Content
Id DSDGP002
Name Trust
Category DS principles
Owner Governance bodies
Statement
DG must establish the bases that regulate the exchange or sharing of data and the conditions under
which it will occur, by formulating the corresponding agreements or contracts, so that an
environment of trust is created between the parties.
Rationale Data exchange/sharing is based on mutual trust between the parties involved.
Implication
Trust in the DS does not exist by itself but is achieved through the application of other principles,
such as sovereignty and interoperability.

--- PAGE 18 ---
Information 2025, 16, 927 18 of 32
Table 8. Principle of sovereignty.
Attribute Content
Id DSDGP003
Name Data Sovereignty
Category DS principles
Owner Governance bodies
Statement
The data owner should have the ability to exercise self-determination regarding the use of his or her
data and, therefore, to make decisions and exercise control over that data and its use at all times.
Rationale
Participants should be able to decide whether to participate in the exchange according to their
preferences regarding content, scope, purpose, duration and participants.
Implication
Without sovereignty, there will be no trust. The greater the sovereign control over data, the more
participants in the data space can trust it. Sovereignty thus becomes an important factor in fostering
trust among participants in the DS and also aligns with emerging legal and regulatory trends in
various regions, particularly within the EU.
Table 9. Principle of interoperability.
Attribute Content
Id DGP004
Name Data Interoperability
Category DS principles
Owner Governance bodies
Statement DG should contribute to achieving organizational and conceptual or semantic interoperability in the DS.
Rationale
Interoperability is a fundamental aspect and must exist at different levels in the DS to enable its
members to access or exchange data efficiently. DS members must be aligned with the DG that guides
the management of data. Furthermore, both the data provider and the consumer must have the same
interpretation of the meaning of the shared data.
Implication
Organizational interoperability involves identifying the stakeholders involved in the management,
provision and use of data, as well as the relationships between them, and ensuring that participants in
the exchange or sharing of data are aligned regarding the principles, guidelines, policies and rules that
govern the management of the data being shared.
Conceptual interoperability involves establishing a common language and reference model to address
the wide variety of data and the relationships between them, such as the development of business
glossaries, dictionaries and data catalogs, as well as the policies and processes for their management.
5.2. ABB DS_Data Exchange
We have also applied the Asset_ABB model to the exchange/distribute stage of the
DLC in a DS (Collect, Store, Process, Transmit, Exchange/Distribute, Use, and Destroy [40])
and created the ABB DS_Data Exchange whose structure can be seen in Figure 7 and whose
description is presented in Table 10.

--- PAGE 19 ---
Information 2025, 16, 927 19 of 32
Figure 7. ABB DS_Data exchange illustrated using Achimate® notation [49].

--- PAGE 20 ---
Information 2025, 16, 927 20 of 32
Table 10. ABB DS_Data Exchange description.
Attribute Description
Name ABB DS_Data Exchange
Description
Develops the enterprise architecture related to the business processes necessary for data exchange
and sharing.
Requirement
Agreements/contracts regulating data exchange/sharing must be defined; Solutions for
“software-readable contracts” must be enabled; Shared data must include metadata specifying
unambiguous usage conditions.
Classification Data exchange, data catalog, contract negotiation
Usage
It is used to design the enterprise structure related to data exchange and to register and manage DS
members, contracts between members, and information about available data assets.
Related-asset
Name: Catalog management service.
Description: Service for catalog management. Allows you to register, modify and delete elements in
the catalog.
Related-asset
Name: Membership onboarding process.
Description: Defines the sequence of activities to be carried out for the application, evaluation and
certification/approval of the members in the DS.
Related-asset
Name: Data asset definition and contract/agreement development Process.
Description: Defines the sequence of activities to be carried out for the creation and approval of a
data asset to be shared, as well as the development of the conditions of quality, use, security, etc.
under which it will be shared.
Related-asset
Name: Data provisioning process.
Description: Defines the sequence of activities to be carried out for the internal data pipeline
requirements definition, the operational implementation and test management for the technical
implementation of the data exchange according to the specified standards
Related-asset
Name: Data consumption process.
Description: Defines the sequence of activities to be carried out for defining consumer data needs,
acceptance of the exchange contract and consumption and further use of data under consideration of
the rules (policies) agreed with the data provider (partner).
Related-asset
Name: Members catalog.
Description: Defines the data entity where the members of the DS are recorded.
Related-asset
Name: Data assets catalog.
Description: Defines the data entity where the shared data assets are recorded.
Related-asset
Name: Contracts catalog.
Description: Defines the data entity where the data sharing contracts are recorded.
Related-asset
Name: Roles catalog.
Description: Defines the data entity where roles and responsibilities are recorded.
Related-asset
Name: KPIs catalog.
Description: Defines the data entity where KPIs are recorded.
5.2.1. ABB DS_Data Exchange. Grouping Related-Assets
In this case, to implement the necessary enterprise architecture (see Figure 8) for data
exchange and sharing, we need to incorporate a process for the application, evaluation, and
certification/approval of members in the DS, before they can start sharing or consuming
data. Throughout this process, a certification body belonging to the DS governing bodies
supervises that the applicant meets all the requirements (regulatory, legislation, standards,
organizational, and technical) to join as a member of the DS and to share or access data
between the members. A process must also be implemented for the definition of data

--- PAGE 21 ---
Information 2025, 16, 927 21 of 32
assets to be shared and the usage contract associated with each of them. Finally, the data
provision and consumption processes must be elaborated.
Figure 8. ABB DS_Data Exchange. Related-assets depicted using Achimate® notation [49].
5.2.2. ABB DS_Data Exchange. Grouping Architecture-Description
As shown in Figure 9, the architecture-description class in the ABB DS_Data exchange
is composed of the viewpoints: members catalog, contracts catalog and data assets catalogs,
roles catalog, KPIs catalog and RACI matrix. The corresponding viewpoints for the data
asset catalog, KPI catalog, and RACI matrix are presented below, along with an example
of each.
Figure 9. ABB DS_Data Exchange. Architecture description represented using Achimate®
notation [49].

--- PAGE 22 ---
Information 2025, 16, 927 22 of 32
Data asset catalog viewpoint
Table11describesthedataassetcatalogviewpoint, whichpresentstostakeholdershow
information about data assets should be recorded so that they can be managed and located
by data consumers. This contributes to satisfying their interest in ensuring interoperability
and data sovereignty in the DS.
Table 11. Data asset catalog viewpoint description.
Attribute Description
Viewpoint Name Data Assets Catalog
Description
Defines the data entity that contains information about the different data assets of the DS. It
allows data consumers to discover the data assets available in the DS, its format, structure
and other metadata. The data asset catalog is a single source of reference for locating and
understanding any data asset. It allows DS to organize all its data sets and make it easy for
data consumers to locate them on demand. It is a fundamental tool for understanding data,
as it provides information about the metadata associated with it.
Type Catalog
Stakeholders Data provider, Data consumer
Concerns Interoperability, sovereignty
The data assets catalog is modeled after the structure shown in Table 12.
Table 12. Data assets catalog model type description.
Attribute Description
Id Unique code that identifies this data asset.
Name Name assigned to the data asset.
Provider The actor assigned the role of data provider for this data asset.
Description Textual description of the data asset.
Logical-model Link to the logical data model associated with the data asset (if applicable).
Physical-model Link to the physical data model associated with the data asset (if applicable).
Lineage Link to the information about the data lineage of the data asset (if applicable).
Data-type Allowed values are: Not defined; Structured; Unstructured; Semi-structured.
Category Categorization or taxonomy assigned to the data asset.
classification Classification assigned to the data asset (e.g., Public, Internal, Confidential, Restricted)
Contract ref. Link to the contract that determines the terms of use and other policies applicable to the data asset.
Store Link to the storage, archiving or maintenance policies for the data asset (according to contract).
Use Link to the policies applicable to the consumption or use of this data asset (according to contract).
retention
Link to the policies on the time and manner in which this information must be maintained
(according to contract).
Security-policies Link to the policies related to the security and privacy of the data asset.
Quality-policies Link to the policies related to the quality of the data asset.

--- PAGE 23 ---
Information 2025, 16, 927 23 of 32
Table 13 shows an example of the instantiation of an entry in the data assets catalog
that represents a hypothetical data asset on the mean times between failures of the hair
dryer product line, which is shared in the DS.
Table 13. Data assets catalog example.
Attribute Content
Id DS_ACME_mtbf__line_3
Name Mean Time Between Failures (MTBF)
Provider ACME_ Hair dryer product-line
Description
Data set representing information regarding the mean times between failures for each product in
product-line 3
Logical model LMD_dbprol3
Physical model FMD_dbprol3
Lineage DL_Aigpl3TS
Data-type Structured
Category operating data
Classification Internal
Contract ref. DSC_240905A
Store Storage audit policy; Operational data archiving policy;
Use Analytics Sandbox
Retention Operational Data Retention Policy
Security
policies
Operational Data Backup Policy; Data Consumer Identity Verification Policy; Data sovereignty
assurance policy
Quality policies Threshold Check Rule; Correlation Check Rule
RACI matrix viewpoint
Table 14 describes the RACI matrix viewpoint, which presents to stakeholders the
allocation of responsibilities for the defined roles. This contributes to satisfying their
interest in ensuring that all the key activities have a designated person responsible for
their execution.
Table 14. RACI matrix viewpoint description.
Attribute Description
Viewpoint Name RACI Matrix
Description This matrix outlines the governance and data management responsibilities of each role in the DS.
Type Matrix
Stakeholders DG body, DS governance body
Concerns Allocation of responsibilities
This artifact is modeled with the structure shown in Table 15.

--- PAGE 24 ---
Information 2025, 16, 927 24 of 32
Table 15. RACI matrix model type description.
Attribute Description
Model type
It consists of the entities “Role” and “Activity,” establishing the relationship “Role Performs
Activity,” which indicates that the role has a degree of responsibility in performing an activity.
This relationship is represented by a matrix with roles in the columns and activities in the rows.
The cells indicate the assignment of a role to an activity and the level of responsibility assigned.
There are four types:
R—Responsible: The person must perform the task and is responsible for its implementation.
A—Accountable: The person has the faculty to authorize actions or tasks and their implementation
and is accountable for them.
C—Consulted: The opinion or advice of this person should be requested.
I—Informed: The person must be informed promptly about the execution of the task.
Table 16 illustrates an example of the allocation of responsibilities for some data
exchange activities carried out by this ABB.
Table 16. Responsibilities of some of the roles involved in data exchange.
Activity\Role DOW DPR DCO DUS CBY
Membership onboarding I,C I,C — — A,R
Data asset definition A R — — —
Contractual conditions A I — — R
Data provisioning A R I I I,C
Data consumption I I A R I
DOW: Data owner. DPR: Data provider. DCO: Data consumer. DUS: Data user. CBY: Certification body.
Key Performance Indicators Catalog (KPIs) viewpoint
Table 17 describes the KPI catalog viewpoint, which informs stakeholders of the
effectiveness and efficiency of the data governance system, as well as its adherence to
applicable DG rules and laws.
Table 17. KPI catalog viewpoint description.
Attribute Description
Viewpoint
Name
KPI Catalog.
Description This catalog contains indicators that monitor the evolution of key aspects of the GD system.
Type Catalog
Stakeholders DG body, DS governance body
Concerns Performance of the DG, compliance with policies, standards, and applicable legislation, compliance.
This artifact is modeled after the structure shown in Table 18.

--- PAGE 25 ---
Information 2025, 16, 927 25 of 32
Table 18. KPI catalog model type description.
Attribute Description
Model type
This catalog is made up of entities of the “Measure” type and includes the following attributes:
• Id.: Unique identifier of the indicator.
• Name: The name assigned to the indicator.
• Description: A description of the indicator, its purpose, and its objective. It explains what the
indicator is used for.
• Category: If categories are established, this is the one assigned to the indicator.
• Questions: Questions to be answered by the indicator.
• Representation: How the indicator will be represented (e.g., graph, table, etc.).
• Calculation: Describes the input data or variables involved, as well as the algorithm, formula,
or operations applied to them to obtain the indicator value.
• Aggregation: Explains how the indicator is presented (e.g., current value, accumulated by
date, or average value).
• Collection: Refers to how, when, and from what source the necessary data for calculating the
indicator is collected.
• Dissemination: It indicates how, through what means, and to whom the indicator is
distributed, as well as when.
• Retention and Disposal: Refers to the applicable storage, retention, and disposal policies of
the indicator.
• Interpretation: Explains how the indicator’s value should be interpreted.
• Related KPIs: References to related indicators.
• Owner: The person responsible for defining and managing the indicator.
Table 19 provides an example of potential KPIs for evaluating the performance of
activities conducted by this ABB.
Table 19. Some KPIs related to data exchange activities.
Activity KPI Name KPI Definition
Membership onboarding
Compliance Certification Accuracy (%) Rate of correctly certificated participants
Average Onboarding Time
Time required from application to full
membership activation
Data asset definition
Metadata Completeness (%)
Rate of required metadata fields properly
filled in
Average Time to Register a Data Asset
Time from submission to asset availability in
the catalog
Contractual conditions
for data exchange
Policy Compliance Rate (%)
Rate of contracts that fully align with
governance, legal, and data protection
policies
Contract Setup Time
Average duration to establish a contractual
agreement for data use
Data provisioning
Data Availability (%) Rate of data items available when required
Data Quality Compliance
Compliance with the agreed-upon quality
levels in the data contract
Data consumption
Consumer Satisfaction Score
User-reported quality of data consumption
experience
Usage Compliance Rate (%)
Rate of consumption issues that are not in
compliance with contractual and policy rules

--- PAGE 26 ---
Information 2025, 16, 927 26 of 32
6. Discussion
DSs are still in an emergent stage [53]. They have emerged as a promising solution for
sharing and reusing data across organizations [54]. The first publicly funded projects began
in Germany in 2015, but it was not until 2020 that the Gaia-X Project was launched in the EU,
focusing on a federated and sovereign data infrastructure. Other initiatives in Australia and
Indiafollowedthistrend[55,56]. However, widespreadadoptionrequiresnotonlyqualified
organizational and technical capabilities but also well-grounded frameworks to address
existing barriers and foster the development of sustainable data-sharing ecosystems.
Copei et al. [57] identify several major challenges. One of the most significant is
the reluctance of companies to share data due to concerns about exposing proprietary
know-how and the potential loss of competitive advantage. Another critical issue is the
difficulty in demonstrating the value of data sharing, along with the need for highly skilled
IT personnel to deploy and maintain DS. At the technical level, barriers include identity
management, lack of interoperability between different software stacks, and insufficient or
overly complex access and usage control mechanisms. At the organizational level, reliance
on a small open-source community is also considered a significant limitation. In this regard,
Moritz et al. [54] add that cross-organizational coordination costs also represent an inherent
obstacle in the development of data-sharing ecosystems, as they require consensus on both
technical and organizational capabilities. This includes aligning data models, standards,
andbusiness processes across multipleactors, whichcan becomplexand resource-intensive,
as well as ensuring trust and active engagement within the ecosystem.
To address these challenges, Copei et al. [57] propose the creation of a robust gover-
nance framework that clearly defines roles, responsibilities, and decision-making structures
to build trust. They also emphasize the importance of clearly communicating both the
capabilities and limitations of data sovereignty, creating incentives and mechanisms for
data valuation, and appointing a trusted data space operator with the financial resources,
technical expertise, and legal authority necessary to oversee operations. Other researchers
contribute with methodological frameworks and design principles. For instance, Moritz
et al. [54] introduce a data service model supported by a set of design guidelines to clarify
available choices and assist organizations in making informed decisions when building
data services. Similarly, Jussen et al. [53] propose a four-phase guide—problematization,
intéressement, enrolment, and mobilization—aimed at providing a structured pathway
for establishing effective and trustworthy data-sharing ecosystems. In the same vein, Gieß
et al. [55] offer a comprehensive solution space for data space designers to (re-)design data
spaces more efficiently and gain a holistic understanding of the key elements to consider.
It is within this context that our work is situated. Our contribution aims to serve
as a practical guide for DS governing bodies to build a solid governance system. The
proposed framework enables the DS to define both an initial and a target architecture,
which can be progressively achieved as the organization matures in the capabilities defined
by each ABB. Furthermore, the framework is designed to support continuous improvement
through a cycle of measurement, evaluation, and action. This approach allows the DS to
monitor the maturity of their governance practices, identify gaps, and activate specific
mechanisms to address them. By embedding this evaluative logic into the architecture, the
DS can ensure alignment with strategic objectives, foster trust among participants, and
build a resilient governance system capable of adapting to evolving technological and
organizational challenges.

--- PAGE 27 ---
Information 2025, 16, 927 27 of 32
A limitation of this work is that the use case is fictional. After conducting interviews
with various Spanish initiatives and projects for implementing DSs and analyzing the situa-
tion, we can confirm that these projects are still in the phase of implementing the technical
solution and initiating stakeholder engagement. However, the proposed framework has
already been successfully tested in industrial environments, which gives us confidence in
its applicability to DSs, and it is expected to be put into practice in the near future in the
Heleade DS project led by the University of Alicante.
7. Conclusions and Further Research
One of the goals of DS is to create value for its members, and this is achieved by
exploiting the data that is shared. Therefore, data becomes a business asset that needs to
be managed like any other asset, so DG emerges as a critical aspect for DS. Thus, after
analyzing the characteristics of DS and the focus on DG in these environments, we have
identified the requirements for DG in a DS and realized that there is a gap between the
various proposals, guides and conceptual models for implementing a DS and its actual
implementation in an organization.
Therefore, we have identified the DG requirements for their implementation in a
DS and proposed a framework that allows organizations to define and implement the
enterprise architecture (actors, roles, functions, processes, policies, standards, etc.) needed
to operate in a DS, based on architectural building blocks that the DS can deploy and
develop according to its specific needs. Additionally, we present a model, the ABB_profile,
to formally specify, describe, and manage these ABBs, facilitating their reuse by members
of the data space.
As future work, it would be beneficial to apply the proposed architecture to various
use cases. This would provide deeper insights into the requirements and finer details of
the business architecture. Additionally, steps should be taken to ensure that ABBs can be
integrated into data space interoperability resources. This would facilitate their discovery,
access, and adoption by data space members, promoting interoperability and reusability.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, J.Y. and M.Z.; methodology, M.Z.; validation, J.Y. and
M.Z.; investigation, J.Y.; writing—original draft preparation, J.Y. and M.Z.; writing—review and
editing, J.Y. and M.Z.; supervision, M.Z.; project administration, M.Z.; funding acquisition, M.Z. All
authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research was funded by MCIN/AEI/10.13039/501100011033/FEDER “Una manera
de hacer Europa” under grant PID2021-124502OB-C42 (PRESECREL) and “The APC was funded by
Information Journal”.
Data Availability Statement: This study is based on a fictional dataset created for illustrative and
methodological purposes. As such, no real or proprietary data were used, and there are no data
available for sharing.
Acknowledgments: During the preparation of this manuscript, the authors used DeepL and Copilot
to improve the readability and language of the manuscript. The authors have reviewed and edited
the output and take full responsibility for the content of this publication.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.

--- PAGE 28 ---
Information 2025, 16, 927 28 of 32
Abbreviations
The following abbreviations are used in this manuscript:
ABB Architecture Building Block
BDVA Big Data Value Association
DG Data Governance
DLC Data Lifecycle
DS Data Space
EDM Evaluate, Direct, and Monitor
IDSA International Data Spaces Association
SBB Solutions Building Block
Appendix A
Table A1 outlines the activities that should be managed in each phase of the DLC.
Corresponding governance actions should be implemented for each activity, specifically in
the areas of data quality assurance, security enforcement, and metadata administration.
Table A1. DLC activities description.
DLC Phase Activities
Collect
Integration and interoperability of the data that is incorporated and how it should be extracted and
processed to create useful data (clean, corrected, complete, and accurate) with the ability to be
stored. It involves converting raw data into structured and formatted outputs tailored to their
intended use, while also ensuring the collection and management of relevant metadata.
Store
Data storage, maintenance, and improvement (the data does not change intrinsically), or for
archiving purposes.
Process
Extracting, preparing, and processing data based on its intended use. Data may be aggregated
and/or combined with other data to enable exchange/distribution, analysis, archiving, or deletion.
Transmit
Validating data and contract compliance before departure and upon arrival at the destination,
ensuring confidentiality and integrity during transmission.
Exchange/
Distribution
Membership onboarding, data asset definition and contract development, as well as data
provisioning and data consumption.
Use Consumption, use, and analysis of data in order to support decision-making.
Destroy Permanent deletion of data.
Appendix B
Table A2 presents Trenti’s ABBs, along with the corresponding artifacts and the tools
that support their creation. The templates for the catalogs proposed by Trenti are available
through a dedicated module developed for the Odoo ERP system, which can be accessed
at: https://apps.odoo.com/apps/modules/16.0/data_gov#module-description (accessed
on 28 July 2025).

--- PAGE 29 ---
Information 2025, 16, 927 29 of 32
Table A2. TRENTI’s ABBs, artifacts and tools.
Grouping ABB Artifacts Tools
Principles Principles
• Catalog of principles.
• Principles alignment
diagram.
• Catalog of requirements.
• Guide 1 for establishing DG
principles and their
alignment with business
objectives.
• Template for recording
principles.
• Guide for creating an
alignment diagram.
• Alignment diagram
template.
• Template for recording
requirements.
Governance
Strategic alignment
• Company goals and
objectives catalog.
• Information needs catalog.
• DG goals and objectives
catalog.
• Requirements catalog.
• Business-DG alignment
diagram.
• Information needs-business
goals/objectives alignment
diagram.
• Guide for developing a DG
plan.
• Template for recording
information needs.
• Guide for creating alignment
diagrams.
• Template for developing
diagrams.
• Template for recording
requirements.
Organization
• DG Actor catalog.
• Contract and SLA catalog.
• Requirements catalog.
• DG organization diagram.
• DG functional diagram.
• Template for recording
actors.
• Template for recording
contracts.
• Template for developing
diagrams.
• Template for recording
requirements.
Stewardship—Governance
model.
• Governance model diagram.
• Requirements catalog.
• Template for developing
procedures derived from the
governance model.
• Template for developing DG
model diagram.
• Template for recording
requirements.
Stewardship—
Policies and standards.
• Policy catalog.
• DG procedures catalog.
• Requirements catalog.
• Policy-principle alignment
diagram.
• Template for recording
policies.
• Template for developing
procedures.
• Template for developing
Policy-principle alignment
diagram.
• Template for recording
requirements.
Stewardship—Roles and
Responsibilities
• DG Roles catalog.
• RACI Matrix.
• Requirements catalog.
• Template for recording roles.
• Template for creating the
RACI matrix.
• Template for recording
requirements.

--- PAGE 30 ---
Information 2025, 16, 927 30 of 32
Table A2. Cont.
Grouping ABB Artifacts Tools
Management
Classification and metadata
• Business glossary catalog.
• Data catalog.
• Requirements catalog.
• Template for the business
glossary and data catalog.
• Template for recording
requirements.
Data quality
• Quality rules catalog.
• Quality requirements
catalog.
• Quality characteristics
catalog.
• Data quality measures
catalog.
• Requirements catalog.
• Guide to data quality
assessment.
• Data quality plan template.
• Templates for recording
quality rules, quality
requirements, and quality
characteristics.
• Template for recording
requirements.
Data security
• Data security classification
catalog.
• Requirements catalog.
• CRUD security matrix.
• CRUD security diagram.
• Guide to developing a data
security plan.
• Template for recording data
security classifications.
• Template for developing a
CRUD matrix and diagram.
• Template for recording
requirements.
Data Lifecycle (DLC) • DLC activities catalog.
• Requirements catalog.
• Template for recording DLC
activities.
• Template for recording
requirements.
Control
Supervision, monitoring
and evaluation
• KPI catalog.
• Requirements catalog.
• Template for recording KPIs.
• Template for recording
requirements.
1 Each guide/procedure will include a RACI matrix with the related roles and activities involved.
References
1. Curry, E.; Scerri, S.; Tuikka, T. Data Spaces: Design, Deployment, and Future Directions. In Data Spaces; Springer International
Publishing: Cham, Switzerland, 2022.
2. Reiberg, A.; Niebel, C.; Kraemer, P. What is a Data Space? In White Paper 1/2022; Gaia-X Hub Germany: Munich, Germany, 2022;
pp. 1–20.
3. Data Spaces Support Centre. What Is a Data Space? 2024. Available online: https://dssc.eu/space/bv15e/766061351/
Introduction+-+Key+Concepts+of+Data+Spaces#What-about-a-Definition? (accessed on 25 November 2024).
4. International Data Spaces Association (IDSA). Design Principles for Data Spaces—Position Paper; Open Dei: Rome, Italy, 2021.
5. Data Office. Plan de Actuaciones Para el Despliegue de Espacios de Datos; Data Office: Madrid, Spain, 2024.
6. Gaia-X European Association for Data and Cloud AISBL. Gaia-X-Architecture Document—22.04 Release; Gaia-X European Associa-
tion for Data: Brussels, Belgium, 2022; p. 61.
7. Braun, R.; Laa, B.; Rohatsch, L. Governance challenges of urban dataspace—Transdisciplinary perspectives. In Proceedings of the
Extended Abstracts of the Eu-SPRI 2022 Conference Challenging Science and Innovation Policy, Utrecht, The Netherlands, 1–3
June 2022; pp. 105–107.
8. International Data Spaces Association (IDSA). IDS-RAM 4. IDSA Reference Architecture V4.0. Available online: https://docs.
internationaldataspaces.org/ids-knowledgebase/ids-ram-4/ (accessed on 11 September 2025).
9. Otto, B.; Steinbuß, S.; Teuscher, A.; Lohmann, S. International Data Spaces Association. Reference Architecture Model. V3.0;
International Data Spaces Association: Dortmund, Germany, 2019; pp. 1–118.
10. Minghini, M.; Kotsev, A.; Posada, M.; Signorelli, S. Scientific Insights into Data Sharing and Utilisation at Scale; Publications Office of
the European Union: Brussels, Belgium, 2023. [CrossRef]
11. Fritzenkötter, J.; Hohoff, L.; Pierri, P.; Verhulst, S.G.; Young, A.; Zacharzewski, A. Governing the Environment-Related Data Space;
European Union: Brussels, Belgium, 2022.

--- PAGE 31 ---
Information 2025, 16, 927 31 of 32
12. DAMA International. DAMA-DMBOK2: Data Management Body of Knowledge, 2nd ed.; Technics Publications: Basking Ridge, NJ,
USA, 2017; ISBN 978-1-63462-234-9.
13. Weber, K.; Otto, B.; Österle, H. One Size Does Not Fit All—A Contingency Approach to Data Governance. J. Data Inf. Qual. 2009,
1, 1–27. [CrossRef]
14. MDM Institute MDM Institute—Data Governance Definition. 2018. Available online: http://www.tcdii.com/
whatIsDataGovernance.html (accessed on 23 October 2020).
15. Gray, C.; IBM Corporation. An overview of data governance elevator Pitch (Final); IBM Corporation: Armonk, NY, USA, 2011.
16. Otto, B. Data governance (Otto). Bus. Inf. Syst. Eng. 2011, 3, 241–244. [CrossRef]
17. Torre-Bastida, A.I.; Gil, G.; Miñón, R.; Díaz-de-Arcaya, J. Technological perspective of data governance in data space ecosystems.
In Data Spaces: Design, Deployment and Future Directions; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2022; pp. 65–87.
18. Yebenes, J. Marco para la Construcción de Sistemas de Gobernanza de Datos en Entornos de Industria 4.0; Universidad de Cantabria:
Santander, Spain, 2022.
19. Yebenes, J.; Zorrilla, M. A Data Governance Framework for Industry 4.0. IEEE Lat. Am. Trans. 2021, 19, 2130–2138. [CrossRef]
20. Yebenes, J.; Zorrilla, M. A reference framework for the implementation of Data Governance Systems for Industry 4.0. Comput.
Stand. Interfaces 2021, 81, 103595. [CrossRef]
21. Dudoit, A. European Common Data Spaces: A Structuring Initiative That Is Necessary and Adaptable to Canada; CIRANO: Montreal,
QC, Canada, 2023.
22. Alliance for Internet of Things Innovation (AIOTI). Guidance for the Integration of IoT and Edge Computing in Data Spaces; Alliance
for Internet of Things Innovation: Brussels, Belgium, 2022.
23. Suzuki, K.; Yokozeki, D. Data Governance for Achieving Data Sharing in the IOWN Era. NTT Tech. Rev. 2023, 21, 49–54. [CrossRef]
24. Micheli, M.; Ponti, M.; Craglia, M.; Suman, A.B. Emerging models of data governance in the age of datafication. BIG DATA Soc.
2020, 2020, 1–15. [CrossRef]
25. Otto, B. A federated infrastructure for European data spaces. Commun. ACM 2022, 65, 44–45. [CrossRef]
26. Firdausy, D.R.; De Alencar Silva, P.; Van Sinderen, M.; Iacob, M.E. Towards a Reference Enterprise Architecture to enforce
Digital Sovereignty in International Data Spaces. In Proceedings of the 2022 IEEE 24th Conference on Business Informatics (CBI),
Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 15–17 June 2022; 1, pp. 117–125. [CrossRef]
27. Daclin, N.; Chen, D.; Vallespir, B. Developing enterprise collaboration: A methodology to implement and improve interoperability.
Enterp. Inf. Syst. 2016, 10, 467–504. [CrossRef]
28. Bližnák, K.; Michal, M.; Pilková, A. A Systematic Review of Recent Literature on Data Governance (2017–2023). IEEE Access 2024,
12, 149875–149888. [CrossRef]
29. Hutterer, A.; Krumay, B. Scopes of Governance in Data Spaces Scopes of Governance in Data Spaces. In Proceedings of the
Australasian Conference on Information Systems, Canberra, Australia, 4–6 December 2024.
30. Solmaz, G.; Cirillo, F.; Fürst, J.; Jacobs, T.; Bauer, M.; Kovacs, E.; Santana, J.R.; Sánchez, L. Enabling data spaces: Existing
developments and challenges. In Proceedings of the 1st International Workshop on Data Economy, New York, NY, USA, 22
December 2022; pp. 42–48. [CrossRef]
31. Gaia-X European Association for Data and Cloud AISBL. GAIA-X Architecture Document—20.04. 2024. Available online:
https://docs.gaia-x.eu/technical-committee/architecture-document/24.04/ (accessed on 2 November 2024).
32. Curry, E.; Tuikka, T.; Metzger, A.; Zillner, S.; Bertels, N.; Ducuing, C.; Dalle Carbonare, D.; Gusmeroli, S.; Scerri, S.; López de
Vallejo, I.; et al. Data Sharing Spaces: The BDVA Perspective. In Designing Data Spaces; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany,
2022; pp. 365–382.
33. Cuno, S.; Bruns, L.; Tcholtchev, N.; Lämmel, P.; Schieferdecker, I. Data governance and sovereignty in urban data spaces based on
standardized ICT reference architectures. Data 2019, 4, 16. [CrossRef]
34. Curry, E. Real-Time Linked Dataspaces: Enabling Data Ecosystems for Intelligent Systems; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2019.
35. Datos.gob.es. The Dataspaces Starter Kit. 2024. Available online: https://datos.gob.es/en/blog/dataspaces-starter-kit (accessed
on 5 November 2024).
36. Data Spaces Support Centre. Data Spaces Blueprint v1.5—Home. 2024. Available online: https://dssc.eu/space/BBE/17842214
1/Data+Sharing+Governance (accessed on 5 November 2024).
37. The Open Group. TOGAF® Standard Version 9.2; The Open Group: San Francisco, CA, USA, 2018; pp. 1–532.
38. ISO ISO/IEC 38505-2; Implications of ISO/IEC 38505-1 for Data Management. International Standard Organization: Geneva,
Switzerland, 2018; pp. 1–44.
39. Felici, M.; Koulouris, T.; Pearson, S. Accountability for Data Governance in Cloud Ecosystems. In Proceedings of the 2013 IEEE
International Conference on Cloud Computing Technology and Science, Hangzhou, China, 2–5 December 2013; Volume 2, pp.
327–332. [CrossRef]

--- PAGE 32 ---
Information 2025, 16, 927 32 of 32
40. Liu, Y.; Gao, T.; Niu, D.; Zhang, H. Research on Collaborative Governance of Data Security in the Whole Life Cycle of Electric
Power Manufacturing Data Space. In Proceedings of the 2022 IEEE 25th International Conference on Computer Supported
Cooperative Work in Design (CSCWD), Hangzhou, China, 4–6 May 2022; pp. 119–126. [CrossRef]
41. Ballard, C.; Baldwin, J.; Baryudin, A.; Brunell, G.; Giardina, C.; Haber, M.; O’neill, E.A.; Shah, S. IBM Information Governance
Solutions; IBM Corporation: Armonk, NY, USA, 2014.
42. Marcucci, S.; Alarcón, N.G.; Verhulst, S.G.; Wüllhorst, E. Informing the Global Data Future: Benchmarking Data Governance
Frameworks. Data Policy 2023, 5, e30. [CrossRef]
43. Wallis, K.; Stodt, J.; Jastremskoj, E.; Reich, C. Agreements Between Enterprises Digitized By Smart Contracts in the Domain of
Industry 4.0. Comput. Sci. Inf. Technol. (CS IT) 2020, 10, 23–32. [CrossRef]
44. UNE Normalización Española. UNE 0087 Definición y Caracterización Espacios de Datos; UNE Normalización Española: Madrid,
Spain, 2025; pp. 1–67.
45. Tardieu, H. Role of Gaia-X in the European Data Space Ecosystem. In Designing Data Spaces; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg,
Germany, 2022; pp. 41–59.
46. Object Management Group (OMG). Reusable Asset Specification, Version 2.2, no. November. 2005. pp. 1–121. Available online:
https://www.omg.org/spec/RAS/2.2/PDF (accessed on 15 October 2025).
47. ISO 8000-61; Data Quality—Process Reference Model. International Standard Organization—ISO: Geneva, Switzerland, 2016;
pp. 1–28.
48. Lnenicka, M.; Nikiforova, A.; Luterek, M.; Milic, P.; Rudmark, D.; Neumaier, S.; Kević, K.; Zuiderwijk, A.; Rodríguez Bolívar, M.P.
Understanding the development of public data ecosystems: From a conceptual model to a six-generation model of the evolution
of public data ecosystems. Telemat. Inform. 2024, 94, 102190. [CrossRef]
49. The Open Group. ArchiMate® 3.1 Specification. 2019, pp. 1–206. Available online: https://www.opengroup.org/sites/default/
files/docs/downloads/n190p_5.pdf (accessed on 15 October 2025).
50. ISO/IEC/IEEE 42010:2011; Systems and Software Engineering—Architecture Description. International Standard Organization—
ISO: Geneva, Switzerland, 2011; pp. 1–46.
51. Object Management Group (OMG). OMG® Unified Modeling Language® (OMG UML®) V2.5.1, no. December, p. 796, 2017.
Available online: https://www.omg.org/spec/UML/2.5.1/PDF (accessed on 15 October 2025).
52. ISO ISO/IEC 38505-1; Application of ISO/IEC 38500 to the Governance of Data. International Standard Organization: Geneva,
Switzerland, 2017; pp. 1–28.
53. Jussen, I.; Möller, F.; Schweihoff, J.; Gieß, A.; Giussani, G.; Otto, B. Issues in inter-organizational data sharing: Findings from
practice and research challenges. Data Knowl. Eng. 2024, 150, 1022800. [CrossRef]
54. Guggenberger, T.M.; Schlueter Langdon, C.; Otto, B. Data spaces as meta-organisations. Eur. J. Inf. Syst. 2025, 34, 822–842.
[CrossRef]
55. Gieß, A.; Schoormann, T.; Möller, F.; Gür, I. Discovering data spaces: A classification of design options. Comput. Ind. 2025,
164, 104212. [CrossRef]
56. Möller, F.; Jussen, I.; Springer, V.; Gieß, A.; Schweihoff, J.C.; Gelhaar, J.; Guggenberger, T.; Otto, B. Industrial data ecosystems and
data spaces. Electron. Mark. 2024, 34, 41. [CrossRef]
57. Copei, S.; Rülicke, L. Best Practices to overcome challenges and barriers during the implementation of a data space for the energy
domain: An experience report. Data Br. 2025, 61, 111838. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.